HIT PARADE
Chestnut Roasters Edition
DEC 18, 20217:00 AM
Slate podcast transcripts are created by Snackable using machine-learning software and have not been reviewed prior to publication.
LISTEN TO THIS EPISODE

S1: This podcast contains seasonal WAM content WAM again and players discretion is advised.

S2: Would you like to swing on a star carry moonbeams home in a jar and be better off than you are?

S1: Welcome to Hit Parade, a podcast of pop chart history from Slate magazine about the hits from coast to coast. I’m Chris Molanphy, chart analyst, pop critic and writer of Slate’s Why is the Song Number One series on today’s show? If by some chance you don’t recognize this vocalist that is the legendary Bing Crosby with swinging on a star. It spent a total of 10 cumulative weeks at number one on Billboard’s pop singles charts, best selling retail records and most played jukebox records in 1944. That 10 week run was the most of any chart topper that year.

S2: He has no manners when he eats a spoon.

There’s a Strange Reason Your Graduation Photos Are So Expensive
Read More

S1: Swinging on a star has become a standard, thanks in large part to its prominent inclusion in the film Going My Way. The Crosby starring Best Picture Academy Award winner for 1944 at that same Oscar ceremony. The tune itself won the Best Original Song Prize, and it probably contributed to Crosby’s own Oscar win that night for Best Actor. For most musicians, feats like these would make swinging on a star their definitive Song the way such Oscar winners as theme from Shaft. My Heart Will Go On and Lose Yourself are the definitive hit for Isaac Hayes, Celine Dion and Eminem, respectively. But I mean, who are we kidding? This is not the signature hit for Dare Bingle. As soon as I said the name Bing Crosby, I’ll bet you instantly thought instead of this chestnut.

S3: He made. Christmas. This is the

S1: best selling single period of all time. Bing Crosby’s White Christmas, a Song Irving Berlin wrote for Crosby’s 1942 film Holiday Inn. It too won the best Song prize at the Oscars. And this 1942 recording has reportedly sold more than 50 million copies worldwide. As per the Guinness Book of World Records, when you include Crosby’s later re recordings of the Song, including this one from 1947, which is the version you’re likeliest to hear on the radio today,

S2: where the treetops glisten. Until.

S1: Bing’s White Christmas has sold upwards of 100 million copies, making it a bigger seller than any other recording more than four decades after his passing. White Christmas defines Bing Crosby, even though he recorded dozens of other non Christmas related smash hits. But Bing is not alone. There are plenty of other artists for whom their holiday hit eclipses everything else in their catalog, whether it was originally a chart hit or not. Last. There are chart acts that had multiple non seasonal number one hits like Wham! Or Nat King Cole.

S2: Chestnuts roasting on an open fire.

S1: Who are now mostly consumed at Christmas. From girl groups,

ADVERTISEMENT

S3: just the last name of the signaling ring ding ding a ling to.

S1: Two Latin rockers,

S2: very snobby, like Feliz Navidad,

S1: R&B Legends and

S3: This Christmas will be. Very special Christmas

S1: to millennial crooners.

S2: It’s beginning to go a lot like Christmas.

S1: Even a former Beatle or two, you might be surprised at how much better their holiday singles do on the modern hit parade than most of their other solo materials

S2: may be having no Christmas time. Simply having a wonderful Christmas

S1: time, you can call these artists Christmas careerists holiday hit mongers. I sometimes refer to them as chestnut Roasters. Are one holiday chestnut, maybe one Song among many has so overtaken their musical verve they’ve become seasonal streamers rather than year round performers.

S2: It’s the most wonderful time.

S1: Today on Hit Parade, we’ll compare some of these acts. Historical billboard histories to the very merry ways their music is consumed today. For some, the holidays will be their main claim to fame in decades to come, whether or not they embrace their status as Santa’s little helpers.

S2: Around the Christmas tree at the Christmas party hop.

S1: And speaking of little helpers, possibly no rock era act with a top tier chart, career has been more redefined by a single Christmas record than the pint sized vocalist, who is in both the rock and roll and country halls of fame. Brenda Lee is the only woman to achieve that duo enshrinement, by the way, and she even had a few R&B hits too back in the day. No matter what chart she appeared on, Brenda Lee just wanted to be wanted alone.

S3: So I love. I want to be wanted, and

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: that’s where your hit parade marches today, the week ending December 12th, 1960, when I want to be wanted. A recent number one smash by teen vocal sensation Brenda Lee was in its final week in the top 40 of Billboard’s Hot 100. That same week, 32 positions lower this Song by Brenda Lee was just making its debut. I’ll bet you know this one.

S3: You will get a sad little feeling when you.

S1: May be rockin around the Christmas tree. Brenda Lee’s definitive recording of the classic holiday bop would not wind up as big a hit in 1960 as her number one. I want to be wanted. Not even close. Christmas Tree still hasn’t topped the hot 100, but decades later it would get awfully close. We’re still tracking its progress on the chart as I record this. Will Brenda actually score another number one more than 60 years after her last one? Will she pull off what you might call a double Mariah? Pour yourself some cocoa with marshmallows and curl up as I explain how legends like Brenda Lee go from chart toppers to chestnut Roasters and just maybe chart toppers again for.

S3: Let me just eyes with us.

S1: Hit parade listeners who play the Little Drummer Boy Challenge or Wham again during the holiday season might just relate to actor Hugh Grant’s exasperation in this clip.

S2: November the sodding 19 six weeks before Christmas and already they were playing the bloody thing

S1: in the 2002 film about a boy based on the 1998 novel by Nick Hornby. Grant plays idol bachelor Will Freeman. Here, Will is confronted in the supermarket by an inescapable holiday Song that it’s so happens, his late father wrote. Hornby’s clever plot pivots on this Song Santas super sleigh. Will is a man child living comfortably in London without a job. He doesn’t need one thanks to his deceased dad’s perennial Christmas royalties, which have set will up for life. Which doesn’t mean Will actually likes the ditty that serves as his personal annuity,

ADVERTISEMENT

S2: but she never officially must have heard of us. It’s some kind of super slice. Oh God, please don’t sing it. Luxuries come laden around the bend. It’s Santa and his reindeer friends where the ho ho ho one and two super sleigh. I expect we will do that all the time. Oh no, I think you two the first.

S1: Sorry. What makes this plot point true to life, at least as authentic as Billy Mac’s plot to score a Christmas? No one in love, actually. Another Christmas Eve British movie starring Hugh Grant is this a perennial holiday song really is like winning the lottery. What also makes it true to life, however, is the way that Song can define a musician’s career, or, some might argue, diminish it. For example, when legendary performer Nat King Cole first emerged as a recording artist at the turn of the 1940s, he was widely respected in the jazz world.

S2: I am as happy as a baby boy who they do with another brand new, Jim José. When I met my sweet Lorraine, Lorraine, who race

S1: tracks like the King Cole Trio’s 1940 hit Sweet Lorraine, were beloved by jazz heads as much for Nat Cole’s Sterling Piano playing as for his vocals. Cole only began singing due to audience encouragement. As a young man, he was more interested in playing through the mid-1940s. Cole had a knack for translating authentic jazz playing for mainstream audiences, as on his trio’s take on the jazzy R&B standard. Get your kicks on Route 66,

S2: It–you kicks on Route 66. Now you go through St. Louis, Joplin, Missouri and Oklahoma City. Lose my.

S1: And then in 1946, Cole and his trio recorded a new song written by jazz and pop crooner Mel Tormé, and for the first time, Nat King Cole layered on some strings.

S3: Chestnuts roasting on an open fire.

S2: Jack Frost nipping at your nose.

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: It was not only a smash, it changed the direction Nat King Cole would pursue for most of the rest of his career. The Christmas song Merry Christmas to You a.k.a a.k.a. Chestnuts Roasting on an open fire, was a smash in 1946. Number three on both Billboard’s pop and R&B charts, and it kept coming back year after year. After the Christmas song, Nat King Cole shifted toward vocal showcases built on orchestral backing, downplaying his jazz roots on tracks like Nature Boy and Too Young. And Cole also rerecorded the Christmas song multiple times, working with arrangers like Nelson Riddle and singing on ever more elaborate orchestral arrangements.

S2: Chestnuts roasting on an open fire.

S1: Clearly, coal himself didn’t mind his shift into soft pop vocalizing, nor did Mel Torme, the Christmas song made him a very wealthy man. But jazz aficionados still revere Nat King Cole’s 1930s and 40s jazz trio records and disdain his pop records, whereas two generations born in the late 20th and early 21st centuries. If they know Nat King Cole at all, it’s as the chestnuts roasting Jack Frost, nipping Yuletide carols being sung by a choir standard bearer.

S2: Tiny tots with their eyes all aglow will find it hard to sleep tonight.

S1: On the plus side, the Christmas Song ensures generations to come will know who Nat King Cole is, but it does skew his place in the musical firmament. Or what about Dean Martin?

S2: One girl, one boy. Some grief with some of my sweet sweet you made of. This can be

S1: the suave actor cabaret performer comic. He was one half of the legendary nightclub act Martin and Lewis with his erstwhile friend Jerry Lewis, and of course, a charter member of Frank Sinatra’s so-called Rat Pack. Dino was also a pretty serious hit maker.

ADVERTISEMENT

S2: The two sets of wine may be more easily made as

S1: they came in 1955 at the dawn of rock and roll. Martin scored a number one hit with the Jazzy Harmony vocal ditty. Memories are made of this. And nine years later, even after Elvis Presley and the Beatles had stormed the charts, Dean Martin went to number one again with Everybody loves somebody and

S2: everybody find somebody somebody.

S3: There’s no telling where.

S1: To be sure, both of these songs are staples in Martin’s catalog, but they’re not what you’re likeliest to hear by Dino nowadays. He has instead become the lush chronicler of avoiding winter by snuggling and boozing it up with your baby, both on the classic. Let it snow, let it snow, let it snow.

S2: And since we’ve no place to go, let it snow. Let it snow, let it snow.

S1: Man, on the now controversial, politically incorrect, but still popular baby, it’s cold outside.

S2: Put some records on while I pour baby, it’s bad out there. Say what? No cabs to be had out there.

S1: Nowadays, this pair of wintry tunes by Dean Martin and Nat King Cole’s The Christmas song are far and away the most played of these crooners recordings on the radio and on streaming services like Spotify. I’ll be using those modern yardsticks alongside original Billboard chart performance to try to give a sense of how Christmas has rewired our perceptions of a slew of jazz, rock, country, R&B and pop eminences. Since the launch of the Hot 100 and a bit before, you may not even realize some of these chestnut Roasters had other hits like this guy

S2: required to wail along the trail deep in the heart of Texas.

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: Gene Autry, the self-styled singing cowboy, helped bring country and western to the masses as early as the 1930s, even before Billboard had a country chart. Autry was scoring national crossover hits like his 1942 take on Deep in the heart of Texas. After Billboard’s Country Chart launched in 1944, Autry started racking up hits. He scored 18 straight country top 10s through 1948, including the military themed at Mail Call Today, a story about a soldier separated from his sweetheart, an eight week number one in 1945 at Mayo.

S2: Call today,

S3: dear. Your last letter came.

S2: I just stood there, my.

S1: Singing about the military was done by design. Not only was there a war on, but Gene Autry had a rep to protect his singing cowboy persona was a masculine archetype, both on the radio and on the silver screen. Maybe that’s why he needed convincing when he was brought this Song in 1949.

S2: You know, Dasher and dancer and Prancer and Vixen, Comet and Cupid and Donner and Blitz

S1: Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer was penned by famed Christmas songwriter Johnny Marks. Like Irving Berlin, a Jew, by the way, Marx wrote it accompanying a promotional holiday children’s book issued by department store Montgomery Ward. Marx himself later called Rudolph quote one of the worst songs ever written.

S2: Other reindeer used to laugh and call him names.

S1: Gene Autry didn’t much care for Rudolph, either Autry had first started edging into holiday music with. Here comes Santa Claus, a Song he himself co-wrote and recorded in 1947. It was a top five country hit in 1948.

S2: So hang your stock in 10. Say your prayers cause Santa Claus comes tonight. Here comes Santa Claus. Here comes Santa Claus, right down Santa Claus Lane.

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: But Johnny Marx’s ditty about an underestimated magical caribou with an electric schnauz that was a bridge too far for Autry. Gene rejected Rudolph at first even as a B-side before his wife convinced him the song was sweet and cajoled him into recording it. And Autry’s career, already at its height, was culturally rebooted.

S2: Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer, you’ll go down in his story.

S1: During the 1949 1950 holiday season, Autry’s Rudolph hit number one on both the country and pop charts. The singing cowboy became from then on, primarily a Christmas singer Rudolph. Here comes Santa Claus up on the housetop. Autry’s versions of these songs are all on Billboard’s Holiday 100 chart this very week in 2021. Autry’s Rudolph is even on the current Hot 100 pop chart for the fourth Christmas in a row, so that’s what happened to a formative country legend when he got swallowed by Christmas. What about a jazz guy? Consider this pianist. This is not a holiday song, but his tone on the keys might sound familiar. Vince Guaraldi never meant to be either a holiday nor a children’s recording artist. He was a serious jazz player inspired by the work of such prior piano legends as Oscar Peterson and Bill Evans at one point around the turn of the 50s. He was even warming up crowds for Art Tatum. He formed the Vince Guaraldi trio in 1955. This take of the standard The Ladies in Love With You was on the Vince Guaraldi trio’s 1956 self-titled album. What made the bespectacled, mustachioed Guaraldi exceptional was how he connected with pop audiences, even after rock and roll replaced jazz as America’s primary youth music. In 1962, when Samba and Bossa Nova were at their crossover peak in The Girl from Ipanema era, the Vince Guaraldi trio recorded an entire LP interpreting selections from the likes of Antonio Carlos Jobim. From that album, they scored an actual honest to goodness Top 40 pop hit with a Latin flavored Guaraldi original called Cast Your Fate to the Wind. Cast your fate peaked at number 22 in early 1963. Better even than fellow bespectacled jazz pianist Dave Brubeck had done in 1961 with his number 25 pop hit Take five. Vince Guaraldi had proved that he had the soul of a jazz bow but an ear for pop, which might explain why a pair of television producers approached him in 1965 to do the music for an animated holiday special. Based around the unusually melancholy Peanuts comic strip characters by Charles M. Schulz. A Charlie Brown Christmas, which established the half hour animated special as a TV norm was unorthodox in every sense, built around actual child voice actors and themed around how the holiday season can be deeply IMO. Vince, squirrelled his music only enhanced this mood. His trio’s jazzy takes on Christmas standards like O Tannenbaum and the Little Drummer Boy set a new template for ambient holiday music and one instrumental and original by Guaraldi that was not specifically Christmas. He became both a holiday perennial and his signature song. Linus and Lucy, a Song named for peanuts, brother and sister, would recur through later Peanuts TV specials like It’s The Great Pumpkin, Charlie Brown, a Charlie Brown Thanksgiving and it’s the Easter beagle Charlie Brown. But it remains most associated with the Christmas season as I speak. It’s in the top 30 on Billboard’s Seasonal Holiday 100 chart. Guaraldi did continue to record Non Charlie Brown music. His 1968 album, the eclectic Vince Guaraldi, introduced his jazzy singing voice.

S2: I’m the family’s unknown born golden

S3: curls of an. Fifty girls with faces.

S2: Feliciano Little Black Sea.

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: Which Guaraldi then repurposed for more Peanuts TV music such as the Snoopy, the Dog Anthem. Joe Cool.

S3: Joe Make. The kid is up and down

S1: when Vince Guaraldi died from a heart attack in 1976. Sadly, he was only 47. He was satisfied with his children’s TV infused recording career. The thing is, even when actual children are singing on his tracks, though, Guaraldi music, thanks to the holidays, is no longer really considered kiddie music. Following. On Billboard’s Holiday 100 Guaraldi Christmas time is here. Linus and Lucy and O Tannenbaum come back year after year. Even more remarkably, on the Billboard 200, the regular year round all genre album chart, the Vince Guaraldi Trio’s A Charlie Brown Christmas is now not only a perennial, but a smash this year in 2021. It has reached a new album chart peak of number nine. By the way, the LP never charted while Guaraldi was alive, and it does particularly well on vinyl. This week, it’s number four on Billboard’s vinyl albums chart, just behind new LPs by Adele and Taylor Swift. Are kids buying all that Vince Guaraldi vinyl? I sincerely doubt it. The music Guaraldi made for a prime time 1965 TV special sponsored by Coca-Cola is now best consumed with a whisky rocks and a long stare out a snowy window. While we’re in this mellow mood, allow me to play this old standard.

S2: Wider No. One. I’m crossing you in style someday.

S1: That’s Andy Williams with Moon River made famous in the 1961 film Breakfast at Tiffany’s, though the original recording by composer Henry Mancini was. The chart hit a number 11 peak on the Hot 100 and the one that in 1962 won Manzini, both an Oscar for Best Original Song and a Grammy for Record of the Year. Andy Williams’s version is now widely considered the standard for Moon River, and Williams did score chart hits of his own on his 1957 smash Butterfly, a number one on Billboard’s most played by disc jockeys chart. Williams was on trend with a vocal that sounded a lot like Elvis.

ADVERTISEMENT

S2: The new flow was somebody new, but I’m crazy about you, you butterfly.

S1: In 1963, Williams topped the album chart for more than four months with his LP Days of Wine and Roses.

S3: The Day. Why? Larson.

S1: That album spawned a hot 100 smash with can’t get used to losing you, a number to hit that sounds both deeply old fashioned and strangely modern can give you.

S2: No matter what I’m trying to do on my whole life through loving you.

S3: Call up some girl I used to know.

S1: Maybe that modernity explains why those plucking strings were sampled more than 50 years later by none other than Beyonce.

S2: All. They don’t love. Slow down. They don’t love you like I love you.

S1: And the Song was covered extensively, most notably in a two tone scale version by British New Wavers. The beat, a.k.a. the English beat in America, used to.

S3: To spend my life loving you.

S1: So, yeah, for all his schlocky ness. Andy Williams was kind of badass, as affirmed by The Simpsons secret fan, horrifying bully Nelson months.

S2: What is this place,

S4: Branson, Missouri. My guess is it’s like Vegas if it were run by Ned Flanders. Andy Williams, we don’t need to stop you.

S2: Yes, we do.

S1: And yet all of those cool old Andy Williams ditties are not remotely what he is known for today. Happy holidays! Happy Holiday!

S2: While the merry bells keep ringing.

S3: Happy holiday! To.

S1: Andy Williams first recorded a Christmas album in 1963. It was an immediate smash, even though billboard at this time segregated holiday music on a chart separate from its flagship top LPs, the Andy Williams Christmas album dominated that holiday chart for three consecutive years, going back to number one on the Christmas chart again and again. And not unlike what he did to Moon River, it established several songs as Andy Williams standards. His take on Irving Berlin’s Happy Holiday is definitive, and a new song on 1963’s Andy Williams Christmas album is I Say This With Love, a schlock classic. It’s the most

S2: wonderful time of the.

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: And for the last six Christmases, Andy Williams has dominated the radio and Spotify with its the most wonderful time of the year. Each year on both the Holiday 100 and the Hot 100, it does a little better. Last year, during the 2020 holiday season, it reached a new hot 100 peak of No.5 this year. As of this week, it’s once again cracked the top 10 and is still rising. Maybe it’ll reach yet another new peak by New Year’s. There will be

S2: parties for hosting, marshmallows, for toasting and carrying

S1: out in the snow like Gene Autry, once Williams went to Saint Nick. He didn’t go back. His televised Christmas specials persisted into the 90s and he recorded a new holiday album at least once. A decade later, LP’s like 1965’s Merry Christmas generated additional hits like his take on. Do you hear what I hear?

S3: Stories start dancing in the night with a tale as big as

S2: a kite,

S1: which, by the way, is number 78 on Billboard’s Holiday 100 this week. Williams died in 2012, just as streaming music was beginning to take over the Billboard charts. If there is an afterlife and Williams can see how Spotify is making him a hit maker every December, he might indeed still regard it as the most wonderful time of the year. So far, all of the chesnut Roasters I’ve discussed have been purveyors of pre-rock music. But here’s a rock and roll Hall of Fame legend who’s still with us and has leaned into her seasonal fame.

S3: Let me. Loving me, I love.

S1: This is the Blossoms, a girl group that singer Darlene Wright joined in 1957 almost immediately. Darlene took their material up a notch, so much so that they recorded singles for a string of labels and got noticed for session work, backing up the likes of Sam Cooke.

ADVERTISEMENT

S3: I told her I wanted to. But to. Yes, that’s right.

S1: Eventually, in 1962, the Blossoms were invited to sing on a session by infamous producer Phil Spector. He’s the one who would eventually rename Darlene right Darlene love. But her first time singing on a spector recording a number one hit no less. It wasn’t under the name the Blossoms or Darlene, right? Or Darlene

S3: love. And it does have.

S1: He’s a rebel was credited to the crystals, a pre-existing, totally separate girl group, inspectors stable of acts that just couldn’t make it into the studio in time for the session. Desperate to get a version of this, sure fire hit into stores before a competing version by singer Vikki Carr, Phil Spector recorded the Blossoms singing the song featuring Darlene Love’s powerhouse vocals and simply printed the crystals name on the He’s a Rebel single. It spent two weeks on top of the Hot 100 in November 1962.

S3: I’ll be standing by. We.

S1: He’s a rebel, wasn’t even the last foe Crystal’s single to feature Darlene loves vocals. She and the Blossoms also sang on the early 1963 number one hit. He’s sure the boy I love.

S3: He saw that line. It’s.

S1: And in between those two crystals hits Darlene Love and the Blossoms scored another hit with another Spector act. Bobby Socks and the blue jeans. They’re R&B arrangement of the Disney standard Zip a Dee Doo Dah reached number nine. Day after the second of the two fake crystals hits, Darlene confronted the producer and demanded that she be able to sing under her own name and save this for Phil Spector. He did give her an amazing showcase. Well. We talked about the classic 1963 album A Christmas Gift for You from Phil Spector in our prior hit parade episode on holiday hits. This seasonal compilation was a showcase for Spector’s wall of sound and arguably the album star. The only vocalist on the compilation credited as a solo singer was Darlene Love. She commanded three songs on the Spector Christmas LP, two of which were standards Winter Wonderland and the song made famous by Bing Crosby White Christmas.

S2: Your Tasty

S3: Mary. Your first

S2: witnesses be won,

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: but the LP’s signature song was an original penned by the team of Ellie Greenwich and Jeff Barry, with Spector called Simply Christmas parentheses. Baby, please come home. With her powerhouse vocals, Darlene Love made this new classic, her signature song, none of the tracks on Spector’s Christmas album was issued as a single in 1963, hence none made the Billboard charts. But for decades, long after Darlene love broke away from the controlling Phil Spector Christmas Baby, Please Come Home was her calling card. It was later covered by everyone from U2 to share, but no one could take Christmas away from Darlene love for 28 years, from 1986 to 2014. Every holiday season, like Clockwork Love, would appear on David Letterman’s late night talk show on both NBC and CBS to sing her song, backed by Paul Schaefer’s band.

S2: As far as I’m concerned, the best thing about the holiday season is when our next guest takes the stage for what is now an annual Late Show tradition. Here now to sing Christmas Baby, please come home, our good friend Darlene Love. Let’s go.

S1: Oh, and it may well be the Song that eventually got Darlene love into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2011, induction presenter Bette Midler seemed to imply as much Darlene

S5: was the very embodiment of teen spirit in the 60s, singing lead and background for Phil Spector with and without credit. These records have remained in people’s hearts. They are still played and loved all over the world. It is safe to say also that Christmas isn’t officially here until Darlene Wales Christmas baby. Please come home

S1: to this day. Christmas baby, please come home is the Darlene love vocal you’re likeliest to hear. According to MRC data, in calendar 2020 alone, the Song was played on terrestrial radio more than 14000 times nationwide and streamed on services like Spotify. Over 92 million times. That, by the way, is 17 times the modern radio spins for the Crystal Song. He’s a rebel and 52 times as many streams. So that’s one 60’s hitmaker who hit the Christmas jackpot. Here’s another from the late 60s and early 70s. Who is also still walking the Earth and whatever you know him for? He was a maker of hits. Or should I say un artiste artista the Exeter’s

S2: one on your high heels, makeup

S3: and your wig? On your big.

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: causeI Feliciano from Lodz, Puerto Rico, projected a kind of post folky, hippie era cool. His trademark sunglasses, worn due to his blindness caused by congenital glaucoma at birth, were purposeful, but gave him a vibe that was in full effect in 1968, when Feliciano scored a massive hit with his sensual, stripped down Latin pop cover of the doors. Light my fire.

S2: Come on, baby light. Come on, baby, light my fire.

S1: One year after the doors took the Song to number one, Feliciano brought light my fire back to the Hot 100, where his version peaked at a remarkable number three for a couple of years. Joseph Feliciano was a pretty serious pop star. His self-titled LP, Feliciano exclamation point, peaked at number two, went gold and rode the album chart for more than a year before 1968 was over. He generated a couple more hits with his takes on the Blues, Song high heel sneakers and the groovy Hitchcock Railway Home Train ticket to sail away.

S2: Hitchcock always surprised me because I’m a dancer, I guarantee

S1: all of these were covers Feliciano had a skillful ear for songs he could give his signature spin. He was defining Latin rock crossover before Carlos Santana had even debuted in 1969, a year when Feliciano scored two more gold albums. One of them a live double LP, a rarity at the time, he utterly transformed the beatles’ B-side. She’s a woman into a minor hit for himself

S2: because she’s a woman who wonders man, but she’s a woman who loves her man. My band, no human presence.

S1: But as with Gene Autry, Vince Guaraldi and Darlene love before him. None of these year round hits were what made bank for Jose Feliciano over the long haul as his albums started to peak out lower chart rungs at the turn of the 70s. Feliciano decided to record a Christmas album has now.

S2: Roasting on an open fire.

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: As was typical for him, most of the holiday LP consisted of covers, but Feliciano savviest move was riding a totally original Song, one whose royalties he could keep. He wrote it one Christmas Eve in L.A., when he felt homesick for his traditional Puerto Rican holiday celebrations.

S2: Feliz Navidad Feliz Navidad.

S1: The result would become a Latin Christmas standard, one that was not only effortlessly catchy but expressed universal sentiments in both Spanish and English in a way that welcomed everyone from headline.

S3: I want to wish you.

S1: Christmas. Feliz Navidad was a slow growing. It appeared on no billboard chart in the 70s when it was new. Feliciano kept himself busy that decade playing guitar for Joni Mitchell on her 1974 hit Free Man in Paris,

S3: stoking in the Steiger machine behind the popular Song.

S1: And recording the theme song to the hit TV show Chico and the Man.

S3: He. Don’t be discouraged

S2: if the mandate so hard to understand.

S1: But quietly, Feliz Navidad started making the rounds as a holiday perennial most prominently on the 1978 PBS special Christmas Eve on Sesame Street, in which Big Bird Ice skated to the Song. And he’s

S2: loving the

S1: two decades later when adult contemporary stations began their shift to all Christmas music during the holidays. Feliz Navidad, which was friendly to both Hispanic and Anglo audiences, filled a useful slot in those AC station rotations during the holiday season of 1997. The song made its first ever Billboard appearance on the adult contemporary chart a couple of seasons later, at the height of the Ricky Martin and Jennifer Lopez Latin pop explosion. Feliz Navidad peaked on the AC chart at number 12.

S3: I wish you a Merry Christmas! La Vida.

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: And then a couple of decades after that, in the 2010s, when streaming took hold on the charts, Feliz Navidad finally cracked the hot 100. Breaking into the top 40 for the first time in 2018. Last year, during the holiday season of 2020, a year when Feliciano Castagna was played 54000 times on terrestrial radio, Feliz Navidad reached a new hot 100 peak of No Kidding. Number six. Now, that might still be a few spots lower than his 1968 number three hit Light My Fire. But nowadays, there’s no comparison on Spotify. Feliciano streams for Navidad outdo those for light. My fire nearly 100 to one. A groovy doors cover that’s a time capsule. A Christmas standard that is eternal. While I’m rhapsodized about slow growing early 70s holiday standards. Let’s talk about my very favorite one. Written and performed by a soul man’s soul man.

S2: I’ve been in so many places

S3: in my life and time.

S2: I’ve Song a lot of songs, I’ve made some bad things

S1: in his life and time, Donny Hathaway recorded definitive versions of several classic songs. Among the first was his 1971 take on Leon Russell’s oft covered composition A Song for you.

S2: I know your image of me is what I hope to be.

S1: As acclaimed as Hathaway’s music was, he was only a modest hit maker, especially when he recorded by himself solo Donny never cracked the pop top 40, and even on the R&B side, he could only get as high as the low to mid 20s as on his 1970 number 23 hit the ghetto. Look at what made Hathaway’s career was, for one thing, his onstage prowess.

S3: To rack up.

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: Even your darkest night, the 1972 LP, Donny Hathaway Live was an instant classic. Critic Emily Lordi later wrote that Hathaway quote could bring the drama pain and joy of soul music to an audience like nobody else, unquote. And the album was also a near instant hit. Donny Hathaway Live peaked at number 18 on the pop album chart and quickly went gold. Remarkable for a soul singer with few crossover hits. But Hathaway’s other great asset was his friendship with R&B legend Roberta Flack, who happened to be a college classmate of Donny from their days at Howard University. As it turned out, their voices also blended beautifully.

S2: You just called

S3: out my name and you know where I am, I’ll come.

S1: Flax and Hathaway’s duet version of Carole King’s You’ve Got a Friend was Hathaway’s first crossover hit number eight R&B and number 29 pop during the same 1971 summer that James Taylor had a hit with the Song the following year. Flack and Hathaway climbed even higher with the breezy, easy listener. Where is the love? Which hit number five pop number one R&B?

S3: Where is a love song? You told me that you love.

S1: It was later in 1972, at the first flush of his fame with Roberta Flack that Donny Hathaway cracked the charts and then only briefly with a solo Song. He had recorded and co-written back in 1970. Just creating the Song was one of his proudest achievements.

S2: Presence and cards are here.

S3: My world is filled with two and. This was. As I look around, your

S2: eyes outshine the town and.

S1: This Christmas was a deliberate attempt by Donny Hathaway and co-writer Nadine McKinnon to create the ultimate black Christmas song steeped in the soul tradition and on trend with 70s R&B producer and percussionist Rick Powell. Recall that Hathaway quote knew what he wanted to do musically and the impact he wanted to make unquote. Indeed, musically, everything about this Christmas is near flawless from its sleigh bells to its brass breakdown. Hathaway’s impassioned, vocal and a wonderfully casual soul piano bridge.

S2: Fireside is blazing bright,

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: though it would eventually become a black radio staple during Hathaway his lifetime. The only charge this Christmas touched was Billboard’s seasonal Christmas singles chart, where it spent a solitary week at number 11 in 1972. It was a blip at a time when Hathaway’s friendship with Roberta Flack was making him a fairly regular R&B chart presence late in the decade. The duo scored one more huge crossover hit with The Closer I Get to you, a number to pop number one R&B smash in 1978 to

S3: love and thus Best Show. The closer I get to.

S1: Sadly, this would be the last time Donny Hathaway would get to hear one of his songs spreading across the airwaves. In early 1979, after a psychotic episode during a studio session, Hathaway took his own life in New York City. The loss devastated Roberta Flack, as well as the entire R&B community. Later that year, vocal troupe The Whispers released the tribute a song for Donny, which interpolated the melody of this Christmas Eve and.

S3: We. So very, very special to me.

S1: It was an appropriate homage, acknowledging the holiday songs emerging status as a standard in the black community and helping to kick off its long, slow climb to cross cultural renown. This Christmas was reissued in 1991 on an ATCO Records Soul Christmas CD release, which helped to solidify the song’s status as a radio recurrent in 2007. The song lent its title to a movie Last Christmas, starring Loretta Devine, Delroy Lindo, Idris Elba and Regina King on the soundtrack. Hathaway’s composition was covered by Chris Brown in the mid-teens covers of This Christmas by both the American rock band Train and British soul singer SEAL topped the adult contemporary charts

S3: a fireside spins by. With Guaraldi to the line.

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: Finally, last year, in 2020, Donny Hathaway’s original recording of this Christmas made its hot 100 debut, cracking the top 40 at number 39, fueled by nearly 11000 radio spins and 63 million streams.

S3: We’re counting through the night. It is Christmas.

S1: In short, it took literally half a century for Donny, Hathaway is sole perennial to become a pop hit, but it was immortal. From the day he recorded it. Last holiday season in the same week that Donny Hathaway’s This Christmas made the American Top 40 for the very first time over in the United Kingdom, the Official Charts Company announced a similarly improbable feat. This 37 year old Song had finally topped the British chart for the first time and well, wham armageddon players, you’ve been warned. Last Christmas. Go ahead. Sing along, if you like, was recorded in 1984 by the duo of George Michael and Andrew Ridgeley, then known as well, Maurice Napes, critic for The Guardian, aptly calls the single quote a high watermark of mid 80s British synth pop song Craft. And as I discussed in one of our earliest hit parade episodes about the career of George Michael, it’s one of very few songs in the final decades of the 20th century to wind up in the holiday music canon. It’s been covered by countless vocalists over the years, including quite recently, Ariana Ariana de. But all of this would have been hard to predict in 1984 due to the on ball place last Christmas has in Rams rise to fame. For starters, last Christmas sounded nothing like the hits George Michael and Andrew Ridgeley had broken with, including their UK debut 1982’s Young Guns.

S3: You guys have done some crazy things. Realize this danger, animals for no time

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: for their first U.S. hit, 1983’s Bad Boys, which peaked at a lowly number 60 on the Hot 100 by.

S3: Yes, ma’am, I sat down.

S1: Well, neither of these songs would wind up as perennials for Wham. The following year, however, Michael and Ridgeley really switched up the formula with the lead single from their second album. That album was called Make It Big, and this single did just that to, well, wake me

S2: up before

S3: you don’t believe me straight on. Like, Don’t you wait here before go.

S1: I bring up the jitterbug in Wake me up. Before you go, go for a few reasons. For one thing, it gave Wham their first number one on both sides of the Atlantic for another. It remains one of their most popular year round radio staples. Their other reliable golden oldie is the single that came directly after Go-Go. The sax drenched soul ballad Careless Whisper considered a George Michael solo single in the UK. It was credited in America to Wham featuring George Michael. Going to dance

S2: again and dance with.

S1: These two blockbuster singles are a useful control group for our experiment in measuring holiday versus non-holiday songs legacies. Both of these songs are still bigger on the radio in America than Last Christmas is, according to MRC data. In 2020, the last full calendar year Wake Me Up Before You Go Go was spun by deejays more than 60000 times over 12 months. Careless whisper more than 52000 times. That’s compared with just 40000 spins for last Christmas tales of.

S3: Well, it’s funny. It doesn’t surprise me.

S1: So why does last Christmas seem to sum so oppressively omnipresent every holiday season, so much so that they’ve created a game out of trying to avoid it? Well, consider that practically all of those 40000 annual radio spins for last Christmas came in the last two months of 2020. If we average out annual plays for Wake Me Up Before You Go Go, it gets spun throughout the year about 5000 times a month nationwide, whereas the concentrated two month play for last Christmas is more like 20000 plays a month just in November and December. That’s a whole lot of George Michael giving it to someone special.

S3: I’ll give it to someone.

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: For another thing, last Christmas only seems to be getting bigger on streaming services. It’s easily wham all time biggest hit thanks to its omnipresence on pre-programmed Christmas playlists. By the way, this automated playback picture what happens when you tell Alexa or Siri play some Christmas music that explains why a lot of the holiday chestnuts I’m discussing in this episode have blown up in the last five years on Spotify. Lifetime streams of last Christmas are about 40 to 60 percent higher than those of Go-Go or Whisper, respectively. In 2020, alone plays for Christmas across all streaming services dwarfed those for Go-Go two to one week.

S3: Yet you could to.

S1: All of this is remarkable, given how out of step last Christmas now is with its original chart performance or lack thereof in the U.S. in 1984. Last Christmas didn’t chart at all, as it was only issued as a B-side here at a time when B-sides typically didn’t chart in the UK. Last Christmas was big, but it never originally hit number one. It was issued in a so-called double A-side single just before the A-4 holiday season, paired with the slow burning R&B lament. Everything she wants.

S3: We know. All the

S2: things in

S1: Britain, as we’ve explained in several prior hit parade episodes, last Christmas slash everything she wants got stuck at number two behind bandaids, enormous charity mega single Do they know it’s Christmas? So when at the end of 2020, last Christmas finally reached number one in the UK, it was a big deal. Impossible, as this may be to believe Wham get honours. There seem to be people who are only recently learning of the existence of last Christmas. And while the late George Michael’s solo career might continue on its own track, of course.

ADVERTISEMENT

S3: I’ve seen some stuff that maybe never have shown the door

S2: because I got to have faith.

S1: It is definitely conceivable that a decade or two from now Last Christmas is the song written and sung by George Michael that will be best known to Generation Alpha or whatever we’re calling them in the 2030s. Oh. We can do this same kind of data comparison, radio spins and Spotify streams versus original chart performance for a range of chestnut Roasters that you might be hearing at the holidays right now. Let’s start small, for example, 80s new wavers the Waitresses only ever had one hot 100 hit 1982’s delightfully snide. I know what boys like.

S2: I like to tease them.

S3: They want to touch me. I never got. I know I like Nike,

S1: but even a one hit wonder can become better known for a different Song. 1981’s Christmas wrapping now generates the overwhelming bulk of the Waitresses activity. 300 radio plays a year to be precise versus less than 500 for I know what boys like. That’s about a six to one ratio in spins, and their streaming ratio is closer to nine to one.

S3: Deck those halls trim those trees. Christmas cheer. I just

S2: need to catch my breath.

S1: OK. What about a much bigger group as I speak? The Eagles are playing somewhere in America and it’s probably Hotel California, but the 70s rock dominators founded by Don Henley and the late Glenn Fry do have a Christmas perennial in their catalog. A cover of Charles Browns Please come home for Christmas, a number 18 Hot 100 hit for the Eagles in 1978.

S2: He’s coming home for Christmas, please come home for Christmas. Not for Christmas.

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: By New Year’s Day and today, the Eagles, Please Come Home for Christmas, was spun 31000 times on the radio in 2020 and streamed 52 million times. Those numbers sound huge, and they are, but not for the Eagles. That’s only about a third as many spins and streams as Hotel California pulls annually among the group’s other catalog material. Their Christmas song runs about neck and neck these days with 1977’s cautionary tale Life in the Fast Lane.

S3: I mean, the say news show that.

S1: So sorry, all you Lebowski, dudes out there, the Eagles are probably going to be known for more than one Song for a long time to come and not just in December. Go ahead and drown your sorrows with a white Russian. As for Turn of the Millennium hit, it might take a while to determine whether their catalogs will be snowed under by the holidays. If you’re a jazzy or classically trained crooner like, say, Harry Connick Jr., Josh Groban or Michael Bublé have a hydraulic Christmas.

S2: It’s the best time of the year.

S1: It’s pretty predictable that your long term traffic will be in holiday fare. All three of these men’s Christmas albums are their respective bestseller. Boo Blaze Christmas LP in particular, returns to the top five on the Billboard 200 album chart every year and on Spotify. Even though Bublé is the rare modern trad pop crooner who scored big radio hits like 2010’s number 24 pop number one easy hit. Haven’t met you yet?

S3: At You! It’s so much more than I. I just haven’t

S2: met you yet,

S1: that song’s lifetime streaming total is less than half that of Bublé. It’s beginning to look a lot like Christmas.

S2: But the prettiest sight

ADVERTISEMENT

S3: to see is the holiday that will be on your own. Run.

S1: For mainstream pop stars whose careers coincided with the streaming era, it may be decades before we know how their holiday fare shakes out. Ariana grandees, Infectious Santa Tell Me, is widely considered the closest thing the 2010s had to a new Christmas perennial.

S2: Tell me if you really. You won’t be here next year.

S1: But as massive as its lifetime streams are 600 million, according to Spotify. That’s hundreds of millions less than such Ari chart toppers as Thank U Next seven rings and positions because

S2: I’ll be

S3: switching their positions. I didn’t get to.

S1: The long view is what’s key. Maybe by 2050, four Grand a Santa tell me will have outlasted all of her many hits for contrast, since Grand has been called Baby Mariah. Anyway, let’s consider how Miz Mariah Carey, the self-proclaimed Queen of Christmas, is faring these days. Folks, I went as long as I could in this episode before playing the song you probably already heard today sometime before breakfast. Now all I want for Christmas is you is about to go to number one on the Hot 100 for its third holiday season in a row. That is, unless Adele has a mind to stop Mariah. In our Christmas 2019 episode of Hit Parade, we talked about how the elusive shanties pulled off the coup of scoring a 19th career hot 100 number one hit with a quarter century old song. But remember, Kerry has 18 other number one hits is her 19th number one, the holiday hit going to eclipse all of them. Year round, Kerry’s biggest non seasonal hit is the 1996 chart topper. Always be my baby. In 2020, U.S. terrestrial radio spun it almost 43000 times. That is less than all I want for Christmas Is You, which radio spun about 53000 times that year, so about a 24 percent gap. Your.

S3: Of nothing, but

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: that gap is nothing compared to what’s happening to Mariah catalogue on streaming services. Remember all those pre-programmed Christmas playlists I mentioned earlier, virtually all of which feature Mariah in 2020? All I want for Christmas is you was streamed a stunning 248 million times. That’s a Drake number. And here’s the kicker that’s more annual streams than carries. Always be my baby. Plus her we belong together.

S2: So part of me,

S1: plus fantasy, $2 billion plus one sweet day.

S3: Is shining down on me from heaven combined.

S1: Forget 2050 or 2030 or 2025. Mariah Carey, the woman with the most number ones of any soloist in Hot 100 history, is already mostly consumed at Christmas. But surely that won’t happen to the only act with more number ones on the hot 100 than Mariah, the band that thanks to Peter Jackson’s Get Back. We’re all a little obsessed with this holiday season. Let’s be clear, there is little danger that the Beatles mainstream catalog will ever be eclipsed by a Christmas song, not one by the Fab Four anyway. Several Beatles tracks like Come Together and Hey Jude are spun tens of thousands of times per year and streamed tens of millions. It also helps that the Beatles never really recorded a proper Christmas song. There are 1967 track. Christmas Time Is Here Again was basically a throwaway only issued to their fan club at the time and not even currently available on Spotify. But the solo Beatles. That’s where things get interesting, because both John Lennon and Paul McCartney recorded original Christmas songs that have exploded over the years.

S3: Two thirds. I’m sorry that.

S1: For Lennon, radio programmers are selective. His classic jealous guy is played on the radio only a few hundred times each year. Woman, a couple thousand times.

S3: Be stay. Child.

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: And then there’s Lenin’s most famous solo single, the World Peace Anthem, imagine a number three hit in 1971. In 2020, it was spun by deejays more than 20000 times and streamed an unusually large 54 million times, driven in part by the pandemic and by the 40th anniversary of Lenin’s 1980 passing. Imagine the. But even in a quote, normal year, imagine gets played a lot. In 2019, the last pre-pandemic year, radio airplay for Imagine was essentially identical to 2020’s and its streams were nearly 41 million. Still pretty huge.

S3: Imagine all the people. For did.

S1: So how does that compare to the consumption of another 1971 peacenik single by Lennon and wife Yoko Ono and anti anti-war holiday perennial that came complete with a children’s chorus?

S3: For we can hold strong Happy Christmas.

S1: War is over. Was spun by deejays nearly 25000 times in 2019 and streamed 57 million times. Both numbers considerably larger than those four imagined for the record in 2020. The radio gap between Happy Christmas and Imagine was even bigger. To sum up, John Lennon still hasn’t become an exclusively Christmas field artist, but he’s gradually getting there. What about his former bandmate?

S3: Maybe ways the way you love. Maybe I’m afraid of the way I love you.

S1: Paul McCartney’s post Beatles catalog, both solo and with wings, does well on the radio. His 1970 classic Maybe I’m Amazed got more than 37000 spins in 2020, and the wings theme for the James Bond film Live and Let Die was played about 33000 times

S3: makes you baby cry.

S2: Say live and let die.

S1: Compare those numbers with Paul’s 1979 synthesized sticky pudding. Wonderful Christmas time with 33000 spins in 2020 alone. It scored about as much airplay as both. Maybe I’m amazed and live and let die

S2: since Christmas

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: time, that’s already pretty remarkable. A twee keyboard ditty Paul tossed off, one that didn’t even chart at Christmas of 79, getting spun about as much as his biggest hits. But that’s just the radio on streaming services who mother Mary bar the door.

S3: I would love to do a

S1: wonderful Christmas time, racked up 72 million streams in 2020 alone, more than double that of Lennon and Ono’s anthem and more than Paul’s own. Maybe I’m amazed. Live and let die and band on the run combined, as with Mariah Carey. It is not too extreme to say Paul McCartney has gone fully to the merry side. Still, Mariah John Paul, these larger than life luminaries are in no real danger of being forgotten. From January through October, neither really will Darlene love or even wham. But there’s one artist I haven’t covered yet who stands, as I would argue, the ultimate chestnut rooster. Her reputation now riding on not just a single season, but a single Song, which is only notable because more than 60 years ago, she was one of the biggest acts on the charts. Period.

S2: You’re dynamite. You’re dynamite.

S1: Brenda Mae Tarpley, born into deep poverty in Atlanta, Georgia, in 1944, began singing professionally as young as five and appearing on television at 10. In between those two milestones, her father died when Brenda was eight, making her the family’s breadwinner. By age 11, Brenda was signed to Decca Records and adopted the stage name Brenda Lee. Lee never grew taller than four foot nine, so when at age 12, she recorded the cracking rockabilly song Dynamite? The industry nickname Brenda Little Miss Dynamite.

S3: They bring this back is a bit like a power plant.

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: Even at that tender age, Lee was a Spitfire. Her singles, like the telephone number Song Bigelow six 200, had remarkable gripped.

S2: And for you to follow

S3: up big data platform

S1: at a time when Queen of rockabilly Wanda Jackson was revolutionizing the role of women in both rock and roll and country.

S3: Lower, you head and the rocket is Bruce Saluja let you go home. What else can I do?

S2: One thing I’ve got to know, I’ve got to know,

S1: I got to know Brenda Lee was doing much the same nearly a decade younger than Wanda Jackson. One step at a time garnered airplay for Lee on both Top 40 and country radio in 1957.

S2: Launch David O. I guess one step at a time.

S1: You got. Lee finally had her major breakthrough at the end of 1959 with Sweet Nothings, a remarkably self-assured single that made both the Hot 100 and the R&B chart number four on the pop side, number 12 on the R&B side, and the track opened very memorably. Keep in mind, Lee was still only 15 years old.

S2: Uh-Huh. Honey, I think about it. All right. My baby, which was in my.

S1: If you’re a millennial or Gen Z listener and that opening sounds familiar, that’s because Kanye West sampled it on bound to his 2013 ode to future wife Kim Kardashian. Well.

S2: Donny. Laming, you know what now?

S1: By the start of the 60s, Brenda Lee was fully established as a teen idol at a time when most teen idols were boys, and she parlayed that image into her first chart topping hit the unrequited love weeper. I’m sorry. Produced by Owen Bradley, pioneer of the country Politan Sound made famous by Patsy Cline. I’m sorry. Top topped the Hot 100 in July 1960. I’m sorry.

S2: I’m so sorry that I.

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: My journal, even its B-side was a smash, and it showed Lee’s versatility. The assertive. That’s all you got to do. Reach number six.

S3: Oh me on the telephone. Bam! And I’ll call it thinking, but that’s all you got to do.

S1: Three months later, Brenda Lee had her second number one hit an adaptation of an Italian Song to tha la vita that was Anglicised as I want to be wanted alone.

S3: So a lot of. I want to be want to.

S1: Striking while the iron was hot. Decca Records chose late 1960 to rerelease a single Brenda Lee have recorded back when she was 13 and that had flopped during the holiday seasons of both 1958 and 1959. Now that Lee was famous, they figured they’d have better luck. It was not only produced by yet again Owen Bradley, it was written by Johnny Marx, the same man who’d penned Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer for Gene Autry.

S2: Rockin around the Christmas tree at the Christmas party, hop

S1: rockin around the Christmas tree encapsulated everything that was great about Brenda Lee. It had Teen Idol energy. She sings Marx’s lyrics about a Christmas party hop and a rockabilly sound that was both country friendly and pop conversant. And as usual for her, Lee’s sassy voice was wise. Beyond her years,

S3: she’s been featured in the halls with boughs of

S2: Holly Eve.

S1: As Decca suspected the third time was the charm for rockin around the Christmas Tree. Rereleased in November 1960, it finally cracked the Top 40 in December, peaking at number 14 in a brief four week chart run. So a truly excellent Christmas single that nonetheless missed the top 10 handicapped by the abbreviated chart runs most holiday songs experienced four Brenda Lee. It was a speed bump within weeks. In early 1961, she was back in the top 10 with another stately ballad, Emotions.

S2: You’ve got me crying. Cry again

S3: when. This high tech in Eve motion.

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: Between 1960 and 1963, Brenda Lee strung together a near unbroken streak of a dozen top 10 singles that blended the ascendant modes of Girl Group, Country Politan and Teen Pop, all before her 20th birthday. Classics like Fool Number One, You Can Depend On Me and Break It to me.

S3: Gently break it. Two major league. Let me. The.

S1: The way that hit, by the way, returned to the hot 100 in the 80s in a remake by then hot country pop crossover act Juice Newton, a number 11, hit in 1982.

S3: They. To me gently. The East Way.

S1: By the time Brenda Lee scored one of her last big pop hits in late 1962, the number three all alone am all.

S3: Am I ever since you’re. We’re just a little bit of my.

S1: But a new generation of hit makers was about to invade our shores, led by a band of mop tops that had opened for Brenda when she toured Hamburg, Germany. According to chart historian Joel Whitburn, the top five pop acts of the decade of the 1960s, based entirely around Hot 100 performance were as follows. Unsurprisingly, the Beatles ranked first right behind them in second place. The King of Rock and Roll Elvis Presley.

S3: We can go together. We’re suspicious.

S1: Ranked third for the 60s, R&B legend Ray Charles, I guess

S2: give you say so, I’ll have to pack my things and

S1: go. That’s right, you know, Jack and ranked fourth for that decade again based just on her chart performance is Brenda Lee, I suppose.

S3: That the number. Is far from being small. And I’ll bet that. The biggest

S2: of all,

S1: according to Whitburn, Lee edges out fifth placers, the Supremes, even though Motown’s flagship girl group scored a dozen number one hits in that decade, leaving

S3: him please Donny. Oh, my, my.

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: By 1967, as hippie era musical fashion turned away from Brenda Lee, she scored her final top 40 pop hit with ride ride ride.

S3: If you’re not satisfied, you don’t campaign on your house and by.

S1: And then she didn’t miss a beat, her music had long leaned in the direction of country. So by 1969, Brenda Lee pivoted Re, promoting herself as a country singer and scoring her first country hits since 1957.

S3: And I can hear. José. Sherry, why

S1: we then proceeded to become a major Nashville hitmaker right through the 70s with such singles as the number five country smash Nobody wins in 1973,

S3: and it’s two.

S1: And in 74, her biggest country hit the 20 Big Four poster bed, which reached number four.

S2: And later I was born there and then people posted

S3: they eat much cash and bought a

S2: plane to catch that’s.

S1: She collaborated with luminaries in the field, such as the Oak Ridge boys Willie Nelson and in 1984, on her last major hit with country legend George Jones.

S3: So that’s how I know now. Yes, I know. Hallelujah. I just love him. So.

S2: When I call on the telephone,

S1: given her pioneering history with Owen Bradley, plus her years of country hit making. In 1997, Brenda Lee was inducted into the Country Music Hall of Fame. She has since been cited as an influence on generations of country pop crossover vocalists from 60s hit maker Bobbie Gentry. Here’s your chance bands Donny. Down to 90s megastar Shania Twain

S2: that don’t impress me.

S1: She came to the debutante queen of country in the arts.

S3: Carrie Underwood had to decide.

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: All wheel drive in 2002. Brenda Lee was also inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. She remains the only woman to be honored doubly by both the Country Hall and the Rock Hall.

S4: I have been blessed to sing and be on stage with most of my life, and this is certainly a stage that I have wanted to be on. It’s a long way from the Georgia cotton fields to the Waldorf-Astoria, and I can tell you that I owe it to own Bradley. And most of all, I owe it to rock and roll. I’m honored. Thank you so very much.

S1: So just to sum up, Brenda Lee was an affirmed legend before age 60, before digital music and before streaming music rebooted the charts, making it possible for holiday hits to go much higher on the hot 100 than they ever had before. And that’s when Brenda Lee became something new a 21st century Christmas queen right alongside Mariah Carey.

S2: Around the Christmas tree at the Christmas,

S1: Lee’s Rockin Around the Christmas tree started reappearing on the Hot 100 in 2013, when it made a brief comeback at number 50. Two years later, Rock and came back and reached number 30, then number 27 in 2016 and number nine by 2018, its first ever appearance in the Billboard Top 10. Remember, the song had peaked in 1960 at number 14

S3: at the Darlene buzz with, but also my

S2: bloody heave.

S1: Finally, in 2019 the year Mariah Carey climbed the last mile to number one with All I want for Christmas is you. Brenda Lee was directly behind her as rockin around the Christmas tree climbed all the way to number two. This resurgence for Lee’s Christmas chestnut has not come without cost of all the statistics I’ve cited in this episode about artists whose holiday hits are more consumed than their year round hits. No act presents a more stark example than Brenda Lee. In 2020, Lee’s pair of 1960 number one hits were not played very much at all. I’m sorry was spun fewer than 600 times on terrestrial radio.

S2: I’m sorry. So sorry.

S1: I want to be wanted less than 200 times.

S2: I want to be wanted.

S1: And rockin around, the Christmas tree was played by U.S. deejays more than 17000 times on streaming services. It was played a stunning 177 million times last year, about 50 times as much as I’m sorry and I want to be wanted combined everyone dancing merrily in the new old fashioned way. Now this turn of events can be viewed as a glass half empty or half full. The near obliteration of Brenda leaves Titanic Multi Genre Multi hit career in favour of just one late breaking seasonal hit feels a lot like erasure, especially disheartening in a world where so few women have been acknowledged as pioneers as Lee has at all. On the other hand, many early 60s pre Beatles hits have been blanked on the hit parade in modern times. The few hundred times a year Brenda Lee’s other hits are heard on the radio or Spotify. Could well be the coattails of her Christmas chestnut blockbuster if even a few rockin around the Christmas tree fans become curious enough to become Brenda Lee fans. Well, she would likely regard that as a blessing.

S2: You’re dying and my father. I know you’re dynamite.

S1: By the way, Lee has now gone back to number two behind Mariah Carey for two straight holiday seasons. And before the end of 2021 is expected to do so again in the most recent chart week. The streaming sales and airplay points separating all I want for Christmas Is You and rockin around the Christmas tree are getting close enough that billboard staffers are starting to speculate that Brenda might well mount a challenge to Mariah if not this year, then some holiday by the mid-2020s. Billboard’s Jason Lipschitz and Melinda Neumann both prior guests on hit parade the bridge have even suggested that perhaps Carrie might graciously encourage her fans to stream Lee’s Christmas chestnut instead of her own one year, giving the 77 year old her first number one hit in over six decades. It’s delightful to picture Mariah and Brenda teaming up in this way and one more thing. If Carrie chooses to do this and Lee decides to make one last run at the top of the charts, Brenda is still kicking. This performance is from 2016, and barring pandemic limitations, one imagines little Miss Dynamite would be only too happy to go back out on the road again. Brenda Lee is living proof you’re never too old to reboot the Christmas party hop. I hope you enjoyed this episode of Hit Parade. Our show was written, edited and narrated by Chris Molanphy. That’s me. My producer is Asha Saluja. Special thanks this month to radio researcher Sean Ross and the staff at MRC data. June Thomas is the senior managing producer and Gabriel Roth, the editorial director of Slate Podcasts. Check out their roster of shows at Slate.com. Slash podcasts you can subscribe to Hit Parade wherever you get your podcasts. In addition to finding it in the Slate Culture Feed, if you’re subscribing on Apple Podcasts, please rate and review us while you’re there. It helps other listeners find the show. Thanks for listening, and I look forward to leading the hit parade back your way. Until then, happy holidays and keep on marching on the one. I’m Chris Molanphy.

Bonus: Big Tech and the Rise of the “Do Nothing” Middle Manager
Discover
My Ex-Husband “Punished” Our 5-Year-Old for Disco vering His Affair. I’m Livid.
Discover
Market Forecasts | Search Ads
|
Sponsored by Taboola
2025 Market Forecasts
Read More
Skip
My Roommate Just Admitted She Has Hated Me For a Year. Her Reason Is Nonsensical.
Discover
My Daughter Did a Favor for a Popular Girl at School. Her Brother Told Me How It Ended.
Discover
MD Reveals: Skin Looks Years Younger When You Eat This Daily
Top doctor urges aging seniors to eat this for aging skin
Gundry MD
|
Sponsored
Learn More
Cinnamon: The Greatest Enemy of Blood Sugar
Magazine Glyco
|
Sponsored
Learn More
The Greatest Enemy of Blood Sugar? Try This Tonight!
Magazine Glyco
|
Sponsored
Learn More
Here's What A Walk-In Shower Should Cost
Brilliant custom solutions for every budget.
Kohler Showers
|
Sponsored
Learn More
Unlock Low Credit Card Rates Now
TrueSearches | Search Ads
|
Sponsored
Click Here
Cinnamon: The Greatest Enemy Of Blood Sugar (See How To Use It)
See this amazing trick rigth now!
bloghealthnet
|
Sponsored
Learn More
Low Rate Credit Cards For Every Need
TrueSearches | Search Ads
|
Sponsored
Click Here
Mix 4 Kitchen Ingredients, Wake Up Thinner Every Morning
Health Now
|
Sponsored
Cinnamon: The Hidden Blood Sugar Enemy? Try This Tonight!
Cinnamon Help
|
Sponsored
Learn More
Thousands Are Dumping Their Hearing Aids for This Game-Ch anger
See why audiologists are calling it a breakthrough in hearing technology.
hear.com
|
Sponsored
Using Glucometer? See The main Enemy of Sugar Spikes
harmonyessencehub
|
Sponsored
Discover Effortless Glucose Monitoring: Request a Free Trial
Dexcom G7 Is Easy To Use and Easy To Get Started. Simply Sign Up For A Free 10-Day...
Dexcom
|
Sponsored
Try Now
The Salt You Already Have at Home Might Be a Weight Loss Ally
Lisamega
|
Sponsored
Learn More
Slate Crossword: Paloma Picasso’s Dad (Five Letters)
My Sister Took My Daughter to the Mall. My Wife Is Livid at the Condition She Returned Her In.
Dexcom G7 is proven to lower A1C and increase time in range³⁻⁷.
Dexcom G7 shows your glucose in real time, so you can make more informed decisions,...
Dexcom
|
Sponsored
Men Over 50: Tired of Frequent Urges and Weak Flow? Try This 30-Second...
Enlarged Prostate Has Nothing To Do With Age: Just Stop Doing This One Common...
healthydayscare
|
Sponsored
Click Here
Unraveling the Secret of Pink Salt for Natural Weight Loss
Lisamega
|
Sponsored
Learn More
Over 50 and Going Too Often? Here's a Bedtime Routine That Might Help
Enlarged Prostate Has Nothing To Do With Age: Just Stop Doing This One Common Thing!
healthydayscare
|
Sponsored
Click Here
Don't Play This Game If You Are Under 30
RAID
|
Sponsored
Play Now
MOST POPULAR
Transcript - The “Polls Do Not Look Amazing For Democrats” Edition
MOST POPULAR
It’s Becoming Clearer What Trump Really Wants From Russia
4 Ways Japanese People Use Himalayan Salt to Lose Weight
Nutrition With Pink Salt
|
Sponsored
Learn More
3 Ways Japanese People Use Pink Salt to Lose Weight
Nutrition With Pink Salt
|
Sponsored
Learn More
Unlock a Phone Deal (See How)
Discover Amazing Phone Deals. Get The Latest Models At Unbeatable Prices
Qsearch | Search Ads
|
Sponsored
View Deals