HIT PARADE
We Invented the Remix Edition
FEB 19, 20228:19 AM
Slate podcast transcripts are created by Snackable using machine-learning software and have not been reviewed prior to publication.
LISTEN TO THIS EPISODE

S1: Coco, hi, welcome to Hit Parade, a podcast of pop chart history from Slate magazine about the hits from coast to coast. I’m Chris Molanphy, chart analyst, pop critic and writer of Slate’s Why is this song number one series on today’s show? Thirty two years ago, in the winter of 1990, pop legend Elton John was climbing the charts, as he so often did with his 46th American Top 40 hit a plush ballad called Sacrifice Sacrifice. For the man born Reginald Dwight, this was just another day at the office. Sacrifice eventually peaked on Billboard’s Hot 100 at No. 18 in a career with so many hits from your Song to Bennie and the Jets to I’m still standing. Sacrifice could have been forgotten, but not this year. There’s a good chance you’ve heard a version of this song just in the last few weeks. Thumping from your radio and I do mean thumping the version you’ve probably heard sounds more

S2: like this could hold.

S3: You.

There’s a Strange Reason Your Graduation Photos Are So Expensive
Read More

S1: Something like this recording is on the hot 100 right now. It was a top 10 hit, peaking at number seven just a few weeks ago. Its official title is Cold Heart Panel Remix. The name Cold Heart is taken from a lyric in the original verse of Sacrifice, and it is credited to Elton John and Dua Lipa. Oh yeah, did I mention this version is a duet? Well, sort of.

S2: I think it’s gonna be. Typekit touched down, brings me round again to find. I think I’m up on.

S1: Dua Lipa, the British Albanian pop star currently enjoying a wave of hits of her own, sings a remake of a completely different Elton John song on the verses 1972’s classic Rocketman, Lipa never actually sings the titular words Rocketman. She is singing the I think it’s going to be a long, long time apart,

S3: and I think it’s gonna be a long.

S2: Touch down brings me round again to find,

S1: in fact, Cold Heart Panel Remix includes pieces of four different Elton John songs, all mashed together in Dua Lipa’s part. She also sings lines from Elton’s Kiss the Bride, a 1983 number 25 hit. Then those lines are thrown into the cold heart blender to. Says. I’ll let you find the fourth Elton John song yourself a brief allusion in cold heart to a 1976 deep cut of his called Where’s the Shoe Rock? My point is this this catchy Frankenstein’s monster of a track is termed a remix. Indeed, now Remix is right there in the title, with credit given to the Australian dance music duo and production team. Pénale spelled P and a few, by the way. But this recording is a lot of things a mash up an Elton John cover by Dua Lipa, a reboot of a 32 year old Elton hit under a different title like just in general. What is this thing?

S2: Well. Cold, cold, hard.

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: Whatever you call it, cold, hard panel remix represents virtually all of the things a remix has become half a century after the concept was invented.

S3: Do it to fight every day.

S1: What began as a deejays art form designed to keep dancers on the floor longer? Typekit. Sue migrated to the pop charts where a remix could reinvent a dormant album, cut into a radio smash hit, Plex

S3: does

S1: eventually remixes of certain hits became the definitive version of the song.

S2: To make this film

S1: and other remixes turned acts who never had hits before into chart toppers. Hits didn’t even need to be up tempo dance tracks to get the remix treatment. Last year. Games and in rap, so-called remixes could be remakes in all but name rebuilt from the ground up. Benjamin Speight. By the 21st century remixes, we’re giving pop stars a bit of hip hop cred.

S3: Maybe it’s because you bought some that sound hypnotize and

S1: mixing up genres to set all time chart records.

S3: Yeah, I’m gonna take my whole studio uptown route. I’m gonna read till I can

S1: no more today on Hit Parade. We will trace the multifarious history of the remix, a musical term with a universe of meanings rethinks Reboots reinventions, rerecording even instances where the so-called remix came before the supposed original. How is that even possible? And speaking of the seemingly impossible in a way, the most pivotal remix in chart history was the one so transformative it compelled a change in our understanding of what a remix even is. It was a perky pop song that started out sounding like this.

S2: Finish what you see

S1: before turning into

S3: this

S2: survey, the way, the way. To start, and

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: that’s where your hit parade marches today, the week ending September 8th, 2001, when I’m Real Murder Remix by Jennifer Lopez featuring John Rule hit number one on the Hot 100. The woman, also known as J-Lo, who was topping both the box office and the charts that year, needed an assist to keep her star rising. A so-called remix that led some chart watchers to cry foul and led Billboard magazine itself to rewrite its rulebook. Two decades later, Lopez is still making headlines for her movies and her romances, but an under heralded part of J. Lo’s legacy is what she did to the definition of the remix was I’m Real Murder Remix, even a remix at all.

S2: And you find the way you smell. You.

S3: Hello, darkness, my old friend.

S1: Where does the history of the remix on the charts begin? Does it even involve a dance record? Could this mellow, folky song

S3: be it while I was sleeping?

S1: And this is the original version of The Sound of Silence, recorded in 1964 by a pair of 22 year olds just signed to Columbia Records named Paul Simon and Art Garfunkel, accompanied only by an acoustic guitar, the sound of Silence was on Simon and Garfunkel’s debut LP Wednesday morning, three a.m.. Produced by Tom Wilson, the album was a flop. But when Wilson heard that a handful of deejays were spinning the folky sound of silence, he had the idea to throw some rock instruments behind the tender ballad to make it more commercial, just as folk rock acts like The Byrds and Bob Dylan were breaking on the charts. Tom Wilson’s remix sounded like this

S3: in restless dreams. I want to.

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: Combs Wilson did this without asking the duo’s permission. Paul Simon hated it, but at a moment when Simon and Garfunkel were about to break up in the wake of their early failure, the folk rock remix of The Sound of Silence revived their career. It was the only version most pop fans ever knew, and it topped the Hot 100 just after Christmas 1965, turning Simon and Garfunkel into one of the top selling acts of the late 60s. And speaking of the late 60s, what about this mellow ditty, The

S3: Long and Winding Road?

S1: Sadly, this, of course, is the long and winding road. The original recording from The Beatles 1969 Get Back Sessions Famously or infamously, if you’re Paul McCartney. This recording was remixed heavily before the public ever heard it. When the Fab Four were on the brink of breaking up in 1970, producer Phil Spector was brought in by the Beatles new manager Allen Klein to review the Get Back sessions and yes, remix them turning them into the group’s final album, Let It Be, and Phil Spector did not have a light touch. His version of the long and winding road sounded like

S3: this for the long and winding road.

S1: Dripping with newly added strings and choirs, the rearranged version of the Long and winding road topped the Hot 100 in June of 1970. Paul McCartney loathed it, but it was the Beatles swan song, their last number one hit. So the folk rock revamp of The Sound of Silence, the schlocky reboot of the long and Winding Road. Do these count as the first hit remixes? When? But. It’s certainly tempting to say no. Tom Wilson’s remix of Silence was the only version most pop fans knew, and Phil Spector’s road was literally the only officially released version in 1970. And it’s not like Phil opened the Beatles record by shouting out Wall of Sound remix. Or Apple records in the House or this is a Phil Spector exclusive.

S2: This is. Missy Elliott speaks. Come on.

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: More seriously, though, die hard, Simon and Garfunkel and Beatles fans were aware that these tracks had been monkeyed with, somehow these chart topping hits are not remixes, as that term came to be understood really in 1965 and 1970. Very few people outside of the recording industry knew what a remix was. But the very qualities that make one want to disqualify Wilson’s sound of silence or Specter’s long and winding road would later be accepted in the world of remixing a remix hated by the original recording artist. That’s not uncommon. We’ll talk about a couple of examples in this episode. A remix of a ballad. Sure, that happens now.

S3: We are still kids, but also in love fighting against a

S1: remix as the only known version that’s happened to in the U.S.. For example, the only known version of the dance classic situation by Yaz, a.k.a. Yazoo in England, is the Francois Kevorkian Remix. If you’re American, you may not know there was another version

S3: watch for that situation moving through the doorway of a nation,

S1: a remix that piles on new instrumentation. These days, many remixes do Sebastian Boms celebrated 2019 remix of new orders dance rock classic Blue Monday showcased to great effect in the trailer for the movie. Wonder Woman 1984 is really a full orchestral cover of Blue Monday, seamlessly mixed with new orders. Original track. This, in part, is what we will be exploring in this episode, trying to discern the boundaries of what a remix even is or how we classify it. This matters because this classification affects how Billboard tallies remixes for its charts. If the main version of a hit song sounds like this.

S2: You got to get out of.

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: But a popular radio remix sounds like this. The artist and especially the record company want both versions to count toward the songs chart position, and they engineer remixes to ensure that both do. Moreover, a truly novel remix can cross a Song over to a whole new audience. For example, when the Kazakh DJ producer Imaan Beck took Roses, a straight up 2016 hip hop track by Guyanese American rapper St. John,

S2: I want them gone on with the party spinning down,

S1: sped it up and threw a new beat behind it, turning it into this. It became a global smash, topping the pop charts in a dozen countries and here in America. In the summer of 2020, Roses Imaan Beck Remix crossed genres number four on the Hot 100, No. One on the dance chart, even number 22 on the adult Top 40 chart. Examples like Roses show how transformative and how creative a remix can be. Creativity was always at the root of the remix, which is more than a technique. It’s a culture and remix culture dates back longer than you might imagine originally. Those roots were not in the U.S. at all. What’s tricky about the history of the remix is that its early innovations weren’t really on records at all. They were mostly performed live. The Jamaican sound system pioneered in Kingston consisted of at least one turntable or more and custom built speakers amplified to emphasize heavy bass lines as far back as the 40s and 50s. Jamaican deejays set up these sound systems to entertain large crowds, flipping and cutting between records based on whatever drew the biggest reaction

S3: to George

S1: pioneers like Lee Scratch Perry would take American R&B records like the Coasters, Yakety Yak, give them a Jamaican patois and then manipulate them in front of the crowd. By the turn of the 70s, this had been elevated into an art form known as dub, spearheaded by studio and sound system pioneers like Osborne Ruddock a.k.a King Tubby. And these dub wizards would provide backing tracks for toasters vocalists who were essentially Jamaican proto rappers such as Ewert Bickford, better known as You

ADVERTISEMENT

S3: Roy Down and tell the people about the mythical is coming your way

S1: with you. Roy would toast overdub tracks by the likes of King Tubby, who could push and pull elements in and out of the recording on the fly. All of these developments eventually spawned American hip hop. Kingston born Clive Campbell, the legendary DJ Kool Herc, brought the techniques of the Jamaican sound system and the live manipulation and elongation of records to the Bronx, New York. In short, the very history of rap, music and hip hop is the history of the remix done.

S3: Perks Merry Go round meant that instead of playing whole records, he would play just the instrumental breaks. Now part rank there would freak out to come up with Bongo Rock.

S1: As for the recorded remix, dance music scholars agree it was pioneered in the early 70s by a model turned producer named Tom Moulton. His first such creation was itself not a remix, strictly speaking, but a re-edit a dance mix, molten cut together on reel to reel tape for. Fire Island Club, The Sandpiper on his mix spliced the old fashioned way Molten seamlessly compiled a string of rock and soul records with propulsive breakdowns. He exercised the less danceable segments to inspire non-stop dance floor ecstasy. One 45 minute tape took him 80 hours to compile. The renowned Tom Moulton earned with that tape eventually led to actual remixing, producing official authorised extended mixes of club bound songs in the studio at record labels behest, which makes Malton the progenitor of what is likely the first actual chart hit remix as we understand it today.

S3: It is.

S1: Do it till you satisfied was a conga and horn inflected jam by Brooklyn based funk group B Tea Express, the T stood for Brooklyn Trucking Beats label Scepter Records was one of the first to target singles at the nascent disco market, and in 1974 they invited Tom Moulton to have a go at remixing Do it till you’re satisfied. Morton’s remix added a longer keyboard breakdown, and he nearly doubled the track’s length from just over three minutes to just shy of six as on his Fire Island tapes. The song’s extension felt effortlessly propulsive. The remix for Do It would prove definitive, as Betty Express’s single was climbing the charts. Morton’s duet mix came to be preferred by radio deejays. The record ultimately reached No.2 on the Hot 100 and No. One on the R&B chart in late 1974. Moulton told Bill Brewster, author of the book Last Night A DJ Saved My Life that beat Express quote absolutely hated his extended mix. But then, when it became a smash, Moulton claims they stole credit for it. Reportedly fibbing to Soul Train host Don Cornelius that they had recorded the track at that length. Quote, I was so fucking mad, Moulton told Brewster. But the very fact that Morton’s mix was so organic sounding made but expresses ly seem plausible. Just months after his smash Beat Express Reboots, Tom Moulton was involved in another remixing landmark when he was invited to work on Gloria Gaynor’s 1975 album. Never can say goodbye. Moulton built the LP’s side a comprising just three songs Honeybee Never Can Say Goodbye and reach out. I’ll be there as a seamless disco sweet. Mind you, songs flowing directly into each other have been tried on rock LP’s dating to the heyday of the Beatles or the Moody Blues. But Tom Milton’s edit of the Never Can Say Goodbye album aimed to keep the dancefloor rolling for a solid 18 minutes. Once again, the artist was skeptical, according to author Bill Brewster, the first time Gloria Gaynor heard Morton’s handiwork with its long rhythmic instrumental passages. She told him, I don’t sing much, but Gaynor grew to appreciate Milton’s work when it helped make the album a hit. Never can say goodbye. Reached number 25 on the Billboard Top LPs chart, remarkably high for a disco album in early 1975, more than a year before similar seamless albums by Donna Summer or KC and the Sunshine Band. And on the Hot 100, the album’s title track Never Can Say Goodbye. Reached number nine in January of 75, one of Disco’s earliest hits. Tom Moulton even helped invent a musical format, the 12 inch single, when he started pressing his mixes not on 45 rpm vinyl, but on LP sized platters in order to maintain their length and take advantage of the bigger discs, wider grooves. For a while, 12 inch singles were seen as a gimmick, then a promotional only tool for club deejays. But the 12-inch came into its own thanks to another remix by celebrated producer deejay Walter Gibbons.

S2: And that 10

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: percent was a track by Philadelphia Soul and Disco Group Double Exposure. They had recorded the single with an orchestra providing disco backing, and the band and the string section recorded more jamming than could fit on a seven inch single. Producer Walter Gibbons took that extended jam and rebuilt 10 percent specifically as a 12-inch. It became the first commercially available 12 inch vinyl single. Though not a big hit, 10 percent only reached number 54, pop number 63 R&B in 1976, in the club, dancers and other deejays were in awe of Walter Gibbons work. Quote This record just seemed endless. Fellow producer remixer Arthur Baker later said I was like, How is he doing this? He must be so quick. I went up to the booth and it was just one record unquote. So began the era of the remix as reinvention, another Gibbons remix of 1977’s hit and run by Lola Holloway sold 100000 copies as a 12 inch.

S2: We don’t typically honesty

S1: and Francois Kevorkian’s remix of Music’s In the Bush allude single, popular at Studio 54 and other Dionysian nightclubs, topped Billboard’s Disco Club play chart in 1978. None of these extended mixes were big radio or mainstream chart hits. Both hit and run and in the bush missed the pop top 40, but by the late 70s, remixes were starting to cross over with the general public. Hits like the seminal I Feel Love, which we talked about in our Donna Summer episode of Hit Parade, had already begun acclimating the public to the sounds of electronic dance production. One year after I feel love was a hit. Soon to be legendary dance producer Patrick Cowley created a bootleg remix, working only from a vinyl copy of the track. Cowley added his own synth and drum parts, transforming I Feel Love into a nearly six minute high energy masterwork. Mix Mag would later call it quote a psychedelic freak out. Cowley’s reinvention of summer’s classic took several years to see official release or to become a hit beyond the clubs. In fact, when it finally hit the British charts in late 1982, Cowley himself was gone. One of the first casualties of the then little understood and rarely diagnosed disease aids. Just weeks after Cowley’s death, a shortened edit of his I Feel Love remix reached number 21 on the British pop chart. It was the first remix many average pop fans heard, at least in the UK. By then, remixes were becoming more widely commercially available. By 1983 and 84 remixes of certain mainstream pop hits were generating Top 40 radio airplay. Arthur Baker’s stadium rocking reboot of Cyndi Lauper’s Girls Just Want to Have Fun helped pump up the song’s rotations on urban top 40 stations and give Cyndi a number one club hit on the hot 100 girls peaked at number two. Some producers didn’t even outsource their remixes. Nile Rodgers, who as we discussed in our chic episode of Hit Parade, was on a roll in 1983, producing smashes like David Bowie’s number one Let’s Dance would often do remixes of his own tracks. Niall’s own retake of in excess, his original sin made that song only a number 58 pop hit into a top 20 club hit.

S2: We long wife.

S3: But what hadn’t quite happened

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: by 1984 was for a remix to become the definitive version of a pop chart hit. Nile Rodgers would be the one to change that when he was commissioned by the top New Wave era pop act of their day. Duran Duran. Again, as I noted in our chic Nile Rodgers episode, the Fab Five brought in Rodgers to salvage a track from their 1983 album Seven and The Ragged Tiger. The LP led off with this song called The Reflex that had a solid hook but didn’t sound either club or radio ready. Duran Duran wanted Rodgers to do with the Reflex what he had done on remixes for in excess. David Bowie and Daryl Hall and John Oates and Nile River next.

S2: Judging by the size. Dancing on the Valentine

S3: Nile Rodgers

S1: remix of the Reflex added rhythmic elements and vocal chops that weren’t on the original album cut that flip flop flex thing. Nile created that the remix became the defacto version of the song played on radio stations nationwide. The Reflex became Duran Duran as first ever Hot 100 number one hit in June 1984. It took a few years for another act to score a hot 100, no. One reinvented by its remix. It would involve another white British act turning to a Black American production team. The white Brit was Wang’s George Michael. George Michael had already dipped his toe in the waters of remixed hits Kwame’s Everything she wants, which hit number one in 1985, generally received more airplay in its extended mix, which was the basis for the music video. It added live crowd sounds and a whole extra verse.

S3: It’s just a matter.

S2: My situation never changes like that.

S1: But George Michael would go much further after he split with Wham partner Andrew Ridgeley. His 1987 solo debut, Faith included a track promoted only at Black Radio Hard Day, which reached number 21 on the R&B chart and whose preferred version was its Shep Pettibone remix.

ADVERTISEMENT

S2: It was no such a big mouth cosmos that tune into hot water.

S1: Even more radical was what Michael did. Several singles later, after the Faith album had spun off multiple number one hits, he went deep into the LP for its sixth single and the ethereal cut called Monkey found. Normally a very self-contained artist. He wrote everything on the Faith LP, often performing all of the instruments himself. George Michael was never satisfied with his album version of Monkey. For once, he was going to involve outside producers, and he was especially impressed with this remix of Janet Jackson’s 1986 No.3 hit Nasty. That’s. After this remix was produced by the same two men who’d produced nasty for Janet in the first place. Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis George Michael was impressed that the Minneapolis duo had added chords to their original production, but maintained the song’s funk. So George asked Jimmy and Terry what they would do with his deep cut monkey. Basically, the sonic craftsman told him, throw most of it away.

S3: Jack, baby, who’s that? Don’t look down at the monkey on your back.

S1: Jam and Lewis’s version of Monkey wasn’t really a remix. It was a rerecording with very few elements of the original LP cut retained. They brought George Michael into their studio to rerecord his vocal in what they called a more funky style. The duo did keep samples of Michael’s voice from the LP version, cutting between his old and new vocals and adding drum machines and other effects to 10. As with Duran Duran is the Reflex. The remix made the track a chart topper monkey reached number one on the Hot 100 and even number eight on the R&B chart in the summer of 88. But what distinguished monkey from the Reflex was the Nile. Rodgers had ingeniously rearranged elements of Duran Duran’s track that were already on the record jam, and Lewis took George Michael’s track, burned it to the ground and rebuilt it from scratch. With the. This was the new cutting edge of remix, and it was only the beginning. From the late 80s through the 90s, remixes, including those with rerecorded elements were big business and often the way laconic album cuts became radio or club smashes. Let’s run through a few of them, many of which you may be familiar. New Order, the British post-punk dance rock band were frequent employers of remixers their LP tracks like 1986’s Bizarre Love Triangle were meticulously crafted to begin with, punctuated by their celebrated bassist Peter Hook. But the band was not shy about bringing in star remixers for their singles like Arthur Baker or John Robie for their 1987 singles compilation Substance. New Order went even further, including only 12 inch mixes instead of the original LP cuts.

S3: Every time I

S2: drove you up to shot. The food is

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: taken from substance, Shep Pettibone, kinetic take on bizarre love triangle came to be regarded as the definitive version of the song by the 90s. It became a late blooming radio perennial and even briefly, a hit reaching number 98 in 1995. Or what about this 80s rap

S3: classic thinking of a master plan? To say nothing but sweat inside my hands, so I stick it to my pocket, all my money spent to watch it ball.

S1: As noted in a couple of previous episodes of Hit Parade, paid in full was the title track of the landmark 1987 debut album by Eric B and Rakim. Again, as with bizarre love triangle paid in full was already great raw material featuring superb flow from M.C. Rakim over the famed Ashley’s Roach clip beat. But then British deejay Duo Cold Cut took a pass at it, which

S3: is pump up the volume, pump up the volume of the.

S1: Producing the now legendary Seven Minutes of Madness remix, cold cut added film, dialogue and samples of James Brown and Israeli singer of the hasard original deejay Eric B reportedly hated the cold cut remix, but it turned paid in full into a cross-cultural hit, reaching number three on Billboard’s Club Play Chart in 1988. The biggest Eric B and Rakim hit outside of Billboard’s Rap Chart, then in 1989.

S2: You know, you know, you got to

S1: express yourself was chosen as the second single from Madonna’s acclaimed like a prayer album, the original LP cut was this horn inflected, Latin flavored jam. But for the music video directed by David Fincher, Madonna commissioned a remix by Shep Pettibone.

S2: Yep, him again. Dun dun dun best. You know,

S1: the Pettibone remix of Express Yourself is now the definitive version. Notably, Madonna included this mix a year later on her bestselling compilation, The Immaculate Collection. By the Time Express Yourself hit number two in July of 89, most radio stations were spinning the remix.

S3: So what? You don’t have to?

S1: Then entering the 90s hit remixes got even more radical.

ADVERTISEMENT

S3: I am sitting in the morning at the diner on the corner.

S1: I am neo folkie. Suzanne Vega opened her 1987 album Solitude, standing with a stark a cappella track called Tom’s Diner, a prosaic, picaresque story song about a woman observing patrons at a restaurant while drinking a cup of coffee. By the way, there is an actual Tom’s restaurant in uptown Manhattan near Columbia University. Vega herself attended Barnard College. Tom’s restaurant was later used as the exterior for Monk’s cafe on Seinfeld.

S3: Anyway, I open up the paper. There’s a story of an actor who

S1: Vega never intended. Tom’s Diner as anything more than an album cut, but two UK producers, Nick Batt and Neal Slate, first who called themselves DNA. That acapella track was begging for a remix, so they borrowed a then popular beat from the British dance group Soul to Soul, fused it with Vega’s vocal and turned the folky into a house music diva. First issued as a bootleg titled Oh Suzanne, the remix of Tom’s Diner could have died quickly. A&M records Suzanne Vega’s label briefly considered seeking their lawyers on DNA, but then Vega, charmed by the dance remix, suggested that A&M acquire the rights to it instead, and he fills it only halfway.

S2: And they even argue he is looking out the window at somebody come in

S1: credited to DNA featuring Suzanne Vega. Tom’s diner hit number five on the Hot 100 and even number 10 on the R&B chart by late 1990. Or how about this total reboot?

S2: See, I was blessed in that department, in my own business as a kick up.

S3: The travel time

S1: on Arrested Development’s hit 1992 CD three years, five months and two days in the Life of People every day was a languorous album cut that quoted the chorus hook from Sly and the Family Stone’s 1969 number one hit. Everyday people like George Michael’s monkey, originally, people every day didn’t sound like much of a hit. That is, until Arrested Development totally flipped it. So for the metamorphosis mix of people every day, which was not a remix, so much as a remake. Arrested Development coupled the original Sly Stone interpolation with a sampled bassline from jazz man Bob James, issued as a single. The reboot was a smash reaching number eight on the Hot 100 and number two on the R&B chart. Around the same time, this track was also an R&B hit. Bill Do. He beat me in 1992 and 93 vocal trio SE W.V. a.k.a sisters with voices hit the charts with Right Here twice. The original version reached number 13 on the R&B chart in the fall of 92 and barely cracked the hot 100. Then new Jack Swing producer Teddy Riley had the idea to place the song’s vocals over a lush sample of Michael Jackson’s 1983 hit Human Nature

S2: and I know you guys.

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: Guys, retitled right here, parentheses, human nature S.W. vs remixed Song re-entered both charts, eventually reaching number two pop number one R&B. By then, even major megastars like Mariah Carey were dropping radical remixes for her Fall 93 chart topper Dream Lover. So. Carey commissioned a remix with House DJ producer David Morales. Together, they remade Dream Lover as a 10 minute house track for which Mariah rerecorded her vocals as Stereogum. No one’s columnists Tom Bryan recently pointed out the deaf club mix of Dream Lover with its four four thud and disorienting ping pong synth loop is, quote, virtually unrecognizable. Yes. As Brian also notes, the Dream Lover remix foreshadowed Mariah Kerry’s future as a remix queen. Her most famous example came two years later. The Bad Boy remix of her 1995 smash Fantasy, produced by rapper, impresario and bad boy label president Sean Combs, then known as Puff Daddy. It featured rap breaks from the loopy old dirty bastard of the Wu-Tang Clan.

S3: Come on, baby, come on. When you walk

S2: by night to

S1: critics as well as Mariah Carey herself have since credited the ODB remix of Fantasy with starting her pivot away from the centrist pop favoured by her label chief and then husband Tommy Mottola, and toward more hip hop directed material. While Mariah was sitting at number one in late 95 and early 96 with fantasy and its follow up One Sweet Day. More on that song later, yet another reinvention was climbing to number two. And as with Suzanne Vega, this act had never been near the deejay booth at a dance club before. Missing was an aching, wistful ballad by everything but the girl from their 1994 LP, Amplified Heart by 94, the duo of Tracey Thorn and Ben, what had spent a decade recording sophisticated, jazzy albums and singles in America. They’d scored a couple of adult contemporary hits, but no major pop hits in its original form. Missing probably wasn’t going to change that, even in their native UK. The moody single could do no better than No. 69 until in 1995. Everything but the girl gave the track to American house music producer Todd Terry. I’ll bet you’ve heard this version. Terry’s four on the floor reinvention of missing topped charts around the world, from Italy to Iceland, Canada to Denmark, missing Todd Terry remix also became everything but the girl’s only major U.S. pop hit a number two Hot 100 smash that rode the chart for a then record 55 weeks. Born and what, we’re so pleased with this success. They converted everything but the girl into a dance act, later scoring number one hits on Billboard’s Club Chart like 1996, Wrong and 2000’s Temperamental. How? How? Everything but the girl weren’t the only soft pop act remixing their tracks in the 90s. But those remixes weren’t always tailored for the dance floor. Consider the Alaskan folkie turned torch balladeer

S3: Jewel See you, me!

S2: And that was meant to.

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: And when it was issued on her 1995 album, Pieces of You, Jewels, you were meant for me sounded like this more than a year later when Atlantic Records decided you were meant for me should be a single. They first tried having it, remixed by producer Juan Patino, into something a little rockier you. When that didn’t catch on, Atlantic sent Jewell back into the studio to record. You were meant for me again. The final version, which you’re now likeliest to hear on AC radio to this day, is not radically different from her original album Cut just a bit happier and brighter. Mentally. This finally got meant for me to number two on the Hot 100 Atlantic, and Jewel then pulled the same gambit with another pieces of you deep cut called Foolish Games, which, as we discussed in our B-sides episode, was originally the supporting track on the You Were Meant For Me single.

S2: Let’s get. These are 10. We put.

S1: Again, as with meant for me, the rerecording of Foolish Games didn’t turn it into a banger. It simply upped the drama and made it a little radio friendlier. The remixed Foolish Games reached number seven in late 1997, more than two and a half years after Jewel’s pieces of new album came out.

S3: Last year. James to. I keep on.

S1: What this also meant, however, was that the 12 million people who bought the pieces of you CD were getting versions of jewels hits that weren’t the ones they were hearing on the radio. Of course, in the world of rap, special remixes unavailable on an album were a badge of honor, and nobody wore that badge more proudly than the man then known as Puff Daddy

S3: becomes the brand new baby in the

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: top. Flavor in your ear was a loping 1994 hit for Bronx rapper Craig Mack. Produced by Sean Combs, who again went by Puff Daddy back then. By October, flavor had peaked at number 16 on the Hot 100 and No. Eight on the R&B chart and was starting to slip. But Puffy would not take that lying down.

S3: Know he had to do a remake

S2: directed by This is

S3: Malik Moore, but the last train to fail

S1: one nugget mine for the remix of Flavor in Your Ear, Puffy brought in a Hip-Hop army. His newest rapper for Bad Boy Records, Christopher Wallace a.k.a The Notorious B.I.G. Plus L.L. Cool, J. Rampage, Busta Rhymes and oh yeah. Craig Mack, who was nominally still the lead artist, dropped just days after the single had seemingly peaked on the charts. The flavor remix literally turned the track around, sending it back up to new peaks of number four R&B and number nine pop in November of 94

S2: on new label could get him back.

S1: Thanks to that remix flavor in your ear went platinum. Not least because it was the only way fans could own the track. It would not appear on a bad boy album for a decade. Puff Daddy rode this Insta remix gambit to chart success multiple times. For example, he turned a Notorious B.I.G. Deep cut called one more chance from this

S3: back bone biggie. Give me one more chance. I got that good girl.

S1: And now to this smash version with guest vocalists Faith Evans and Mary J. Blige, a number one R&B number two hit in 1995.

S2: I got the good note. He.

S1: Once he started wrapping himself, Puffy would even rethink his own tracks, often fundamentally 1997’s It’s All About the Benjamins, started as a rap posse, cut with puffy biggie Lil Kim and rap troupe Velux.

ADVERTISEMENT

S3: It’s all about what you want to do. You want to be flawless and just call us brawlers.

S1: But then Combs rebooted it as a rock song and over Posse Cut that included all of those original rappers, plus rockers Tommy Stinson, Fuzzy Bubble, Rob Zombie and on drums Foo Fighters Dave Grohl.

S2: Which one do you want to be shot? All those who did

S1: it was the George Michael monkey gambit on steroids. A so-called remix that was not just a self cover, not just a duel style freshening up, but a top to bottom overhaul. The Sean Combs philosophy, basically that anything could be a remix became coin of the realm on the charts as the 21st century approached. As influential as Puffy was on the trajectory of the remix. However, this concept would reach full flower not on one of his productions, but on the music of a woman he began dating in 1999. So. He’s a dancer and actress who was now launching a singing career. Sean Combs actually produced a track on her debut album called Feeling So Good It would be the first and last time Puffy produced a single for his then girlfriend, Jennifer Lopez. There were rappers on feeling so good. The emcees Fat Joe and Big Punisher, so you have to be thrilled. You know, we never Frisch, but this was an amuse bouche for what Lopez would do. Just a couple of years later,

S3: possibly be this passion and setting me free

S1: from her very first album, 1999’s On the Six, Jennifer Lopez and her team at Sony Music aimed her singles at multiple audiences. For example, waiting for tonight, a Latin house banger was serviced not just to Top 40 radio stations, but also Spanish language stations. In a version called Una Notchy Mass and to club deejays in a remix by house producer Tax Hector. Gave all the Hex Hector remix was actually a hit first. Topping Billboard’s Club play chart more than a month before the pop version peaked at number eight on the Hot 100. Team Lopez even recut the Waiting For Tonight video with Hector’s version to reinforce her club credentials and keep the track fresh. All this was child’s play, compared to the promotional blitz that greeted Jennifer Lopez’s second album, 2001’s J.Lo, by the way, the disc that permanently established that well-known nickname Lopez’s management wanted to affirm her as a queen of all media. So Sony Music dropped the J.Lo CD the same week Sony Pictures released her romantic comedy The Wedding Planner. When J.Lo debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 in early February, Lopez became the first artist to have the top album and the top movie at the box office in the same week, a milestone that frankly was not really a thing before Team Lopez made it a thing on the Hot 100. The album’s lead single Love Don’t Cost a Thing, was already lodged in the top five.

S2: Even if you were both my doctor.

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: Everything seemed to be going brilliantly for J-Lo, the person and the album until the wheels started to come off a couple of months later. A second single from the album, the electro pop track play, whiffed on the charts in the spring of 01, peaking at number 18.

S3: Sure, say it just.

S1: And consequently, the album began to tumble on the charts, even briefly falling out of the top 100 a liability for an artist of Lopez’s stature. What especially concerned Sony was that black radio in particular was averse to playing Lopez at a moment when hip hop and R&B were taking over the pop charts. And it didn’t look like JLo’s next single would right the ship.

S2: Finish what you see,

S1: the original version of I’m a Real was a percolating 80s flavored dance pop ditty by the start of the summer of 01, promotion for the track had already begun. Lopez shot a glossy video and the track was serviced to Top 40 radio stations. But Lopez’s producer, Corey Rooney, feared that I’m real like the play single might stiff on the very hip hop centric radio of the early aughts quote. I said, we have to work with a person that radio cannot refuse. Rooney told Billboard Book of Number One Hits author Fred Bronson, adding quote at the time that was George rule.

S2: He went on. Oh, my goodness. And I don’t want to go.

S1: Born Jeffrey Atkins in Queens, New York. The gruff voiced jowl rule was indeed on a roll in 2000 and 2001, racking up a string of hits on the hip hop plus pop label Murder Inc.. Notably in keeping with his thug and love image. Virtually all of your rule’s biggest hits of that year were pairings with female singers and rappers like Christina Million, Lil Mo and Vida. So Corey Rooney had the idea that John Rule could score his next hit duet with Jennifer Lopez, and he gave John and the Murder Inc team carte blanche to remake I’m Real. However, they saw fit what Rooney was banking on was that a pop version of I’m Real and a hip hop version of I’m Real could not only blanket multiple radio formats but climb the charts fused together as a single hit called I’m Real. There was precedent for this, even beyond the work of Lopez’s ex-boyfriend, Sean Combs. Generally, Billboard would track a remixed hit separately only if it had a different title, such as, for example, when rapper Big Punisher had a number 19 R&B hit in 1998 called I’m Not a Player. Yo, I ain’t to play.

ADVERTISEMENT

S3: Yeah, I just crush a large jump on top of the rock and with some hits until I pass the shot. It doesn’t stop

S1: which big pun then followed with the similarly titled but completely separate hit. Still not a player, that so-called remix really an all new track got to number six R&B and crossed to the pop charts, reaching number 24 on the Hot 100 in a completely separate run.

S3: Comes out of play out

S1: on, on the other hand, Nashville Group Lone Star scored a 1999 country smash with amazed. A ballad that gradually began crossing over to adult contemporary and even some pop stations.

S2: I want to spend the rest.

S1: Song so Lone Star re-recorded amazed with pop leaning instrumentation, removing the pedal steel and other twangy country instruments. But because this re-recording was still called amazed airplay for both versions contributed to the same chart position, helping Lone Star climb all the way to number one on the Hot 100 in March of 2000. This, in short, was the strategy Corey Rooney and the Sony team hoped to follow when they commissioned the so-called murder remix of J-Lo’s. I’m real. Remember, the original pop version of I’m Real sounded like this.

S3: I’m pretty shocked to see.

S1: But the track George rule and the Murder Inc team came up with for Lopez sounded like this.

S2: Way, world, the way you with me,

S1: if you’re trying right now to listen for the elements of the original version that were carried over to the remix. Let me save you the trouble. There are none. Virtually nothing about the new recording matched the old, not the tempo, the melody or the lyrics. Beyond the titular refrain, even the chorus was different. The important part, as far as Team Lopez was concerned, was that both songs were titled I’m Real and could therefore both contribute to its chart position.

S3: I made the Katy topping

ADVERTISEMENT

S2: in happiness rather than the day before winning the wind simplicity the same day.

S1: But this was kind of fraudulent and fairly unprecedented, even in cases like George Michael’s monkey in the 80s. Jules, you were meant for me in the 90s and loan stars amazed. In 2000, a fully rerecorded hit that was called a remix was at least a new recording of the same composition. The two IME reels had nothing to do with each other as songs,

S3: you know, like some, I dressed up in my

S1: head. Yet Billboard allowed Sony’s Gambit to proceed from July through early September 2001 on the Hot 100. I’m Real was listed as a Jennifer Lopez solo single. Pop stations were at that point, mostly playing the original version. The week it reached number one, however, Billboard changed the artist credit to Jennifer Lopez featuring George rule because by then, the magazine reported 85 percent of the airplay was for the murder remix. Several things were controversial about this remix and a bit unfortunate. For one thing, it happened to be number one the week of the tragedy of September 11th. Not a great national event to be associated with. I’m real trying to reel for another thing in the Murder Inc team’s zeal to make J-Lo Sound Street. She drops the N-word in one of her verses for which she was roundly castigated in the media. I won’t highlight that lyric for you, but it’s still out there. If you want to hear it for yourself. In any case, none of this notoriety seemed to harm the song’s commercial prospects. I’m Real went on to spend five weeks at number one, both before and after September 11th. Perhaps it provided some welcome distraction, but in the insular world of the music business, the most controversial thing about I’m real was its split personality. Across the industry, chart watchers and rival labels cried foul. This was not a remix by the end of 2001. Billboard magazine agreed in a policy statement published in its issue dated December 1st, 2001, Billboard’s editors wrote Quote The art of remixing songs has taken on a life of its own to the point where some remixed versions in no way resemble the original recording for some of these songs. Perhaps remade is a more appropriate description than remixed, effective with the first week of 2002. Billboard will treat rerecorded songs that bear no resemblance to the original recording as a separate and distinctive song for the purposes of chart tracking. The guidelines are lyric and melody if neither element is similar to the original recording. The two versions will not be

S3: merged

S2: until you just can’t. Even though apparently just

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: perhaps sensing which way the wind was blowing in the fall of 01, Lopez’s team immediately repeated their aim real stunt. Lopez went back into the studio with George rule to reimagine another J.Lo track. Ain’t it funny as a totally new song by that Typekit

S2: Lopez that she came around? Now you want to

S3: see what’s was going down

S1: on Billboard in a concession to Sony Music, which did manage to get Lopez and George Rule’s latest onto the charts by mid-December 2001 grandfathered in. Ain’t it funny? The original and the unrelated murder remix version were merged into a single hot 100 slot. Ain’t it funny? Reached number one in March 2002, the last hit permitted to artificially conjoin separate compositions under the same song title.

S3: So how you walk away?

S1: Even when I try to call you the first major artist to feel the impact of the new J.Lo rule was Lopez’s ex paramour, Sean Combs, who, by the way, now went by P. Diddy. Diddy would not be deterred in a total flex. He titled his 2002 Bad Boy family compilation. We invented the Remix King, Tubby and Tom Moulton. Call your lawyers rather than shrinking from the challenge. If anything, Diddy was glorying in the new Remix World Order. We invented the remix included two tracks, both called I Need a Girl that were separate songs Lopez style only now under the new Billboard rules. Both versions were smash and separate chart hits, but neither.

S3: Your mates nationally known on the microphone. I got it all, but I really need a wife at home.

S1: I need a girl. Part one by P. Diddy, featuring singer Usher and rapper Loon. Reached number two on the Hot 100 in May 2002 and a couple of months later.

ADVERTISEMENT

S3: You may believe again, if you have been and be with him. Go ahead.

S1: Mommy, breathe again. The completely different I need a girl. Part two, featuring Loon, Ginuwine and Mario Winans reached number four under the old chart system. Perhaps I need a girl would have been merged into a single number one hit rather than a pair of separate top five hits. But Diddy didn’t seem to mind one year after Diddy’s gambit. Soul singer and future jailed sex offender R. Kelly pulled an even bigger flex with Ignition Remix, a number two smash that was written before it’s related but separate album track Ignition Kelly’s Ignition Remix, a totally great song which, by the way, we will not be playing for you on hit parade here or ever again was not just the only version of the song issued with a music video in the lyrics. Kelly actually referenced its remix status right in the chorus. Quote It’s the remix to Ignition hot and fresh out the kitchen, unquote. The remix was now commenting upon itself, and by the way, Jennifer Lopez. As you can tell from our vantage point two decades later, as she enjoys headlines about her latest wedding themed movie and her revived romance with actor Ben Affleck, she survived her various controversies just fine. By 2003, she was back on top of the Hot 100 with another jam that leaned into her prevailing J-Lo Plus rapper style, a duet with hip hop legend L.L. Cool J called All I Have. Now that the chart rules had changed, there was only one version of all I have. Turns out J.Lo could top the charts just fine without an artificial assist.

S3: Oh my! Protests, which you had baby girl on, which.

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: You’ve been doing for a while in the mid aughts, other acts were trying the flex of scoring pairs of separate hits under the same title in 2004. Rap rock band Linkin Park took their angst ridden Shout Fest numb to the hot 100. Twice first in its original Emo Nu Metal form, which reached number 11 out.

S2: So I can’t be.

S1: And then just a few months later, a team up with rap king Jay-Z called Numb Slash Encore. The mash up of Lincoln Park’s track with Jay’s Black Album Song Encore charted separately from the Linkin Park original version of numbe and reached number 20.

S3: You know, precedente whole riddle me that the rest of you know him there can never y’all mirror me back. You hear me. Rappers fight Kanchi rap in his prime.

S1: If anyone tried the pre 2002 tactic of different songs with the same title. Billboard held the line in 2005. 50 Cent’s out of Control was remixed, really remade from its version on 50’s album The Massacre. The new out of control featured rap duo

S3: Mobb Deep Gotti Go Go, you know. What it takes to make the club go into the

S1: dance and the music while the remix was climbing the charts for just one week. The original album version of Fit is Out of Control, scored enough download sales to make the Hot 100 on its own stage show the global session at.

S3: Change.

S1: That was to again under pre 2002 rules. The two outer controls would have been combined pushing a single chart entry up the Hot 100 instead, the 50 cent solo out of control spent just one week at number 92 and fell off. A week later, the Fitty and Mobb Deep remix of Out of Control ranked at number 25 that week. It eventually reached number six with no help from the original album Cut. One remix tactic that was still chart legal, however, was a featured artist collaboration built out of the original recording, and by the mid aughts, digital downloads powered by Apple’s iTunes Music Store were a factor on the Hot 100 for the labels and their star artists in the download era. There was strong incentive to keep a rising Song Frisch by any means necessary, including, say, adding a rapper to a pop song by the turn of the 10s. This remix tactic would be weaponized in an unprecedented way.

ADVERTISEMENT

S3: Greetings, loved ones. Let’s take a cherry site down plays the

S1: lead single of Katy Perry’s 2010 album Teenage Dream was California Girls, a sunny pop confection with a disco and electro dance vibe. The song was an instant hit. Shooting to No.1 one in under a month. Notably, California girls had a featured performer from the jump. Both the album version and the single featured West Coast rap legend Snoop Dogg,

S2: which I don’t know J.

S3: And fit and ready, Tony

S1: Perry’s next two singles, however, didn’t need an assist from a rapper. The wistful title track of Teenage Dream reached number one in September 2010. Like you. And the chest thumping firework reached the summit in December. Three straight number one singles was the best Katy Perry had ever done on the charts. Her previous album, 2008’s One of the Boys, had spawned only one chart topper. The Troll Gaisie I Kissed a Girl. The Teenage Dream album was now on a roll. And Perry’s label, Capitol Records, was looking to maintain the momentum. But now that its three most obvious singles had already been released, finding more no ones was going to get tougher and Teen Perry was going to have to get creative.

S2: Kissed me with the. It defies decided

S1: early in the teenage dream campaign, just before the album dropped. Capital released a deep cut from the album called E.T. As a promotional single at iTunes, E.T. was a quirky, spicy track about alien sex that sounded like trap music crossed with the hard rock band Evanescence. It spent just one week on the Hot 100 in September 2010, purchased mostly by rabid Katy. Fans on iTunes then dropped off the chart completely. Reportedly, Katy Perry thought it could be a hit, and capital was skeptical. But now that they needed a fourth single, E.T. looked like a better bet, just in case capital called in for reinforcements.

S2: I know, Bob.

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: Kanye West, then at the zenith of his acclaim just after the release of his album My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy, contributed some dark, twisted rap verses to a remix of Perry’s E.T.. However awkward some of West’s embellishments were,

S3: then I’m a pro-Bush objected to, so I tell you what to do. I tell you what to

S2: do, what to do and what to do.

S1: This was a clever way to make a months old album cut new, both for Perry’s hardcore fans and more casual radio listeners. In March of 2011, T Ri debuted on the Hot 100 at number 25. It was now credited to Katy Perry featuring Kanye West. Since the bulk of the sales and the airplay were for the remix. But importantly, consumption of either version of the song would count toward its chart position. Since the Kanye remix was simply an embellishment of the original recording, this ultimately was what Capital and Katy Perry wanted terrestrial. It reached the top of the Hot 100 in April, the fourth number one single culled from the Teenage Dream album. Other promotional teams on other labels took note of this gambit and immediately replicated it to great success. Barbadian pop goddess Rihanna nudged her lewd but lagging hit S&M to number one by dropping a remix with fellow pop deity Britney Spears. S&M credited to Rihanna and Britney hit the top for a single week, actually interrupting Perry’s and West’s five week run with

S3: the YouTube channel website site.

S2: Oh, come on, I like I like golf.

S1: Two weeks after that, Britney pulled the remix gambit herself dropping a new version of her acclaimed hit Til the World Ends, with new vocals by Nicki Minaj and Kesha that revived that, flagging single and vaulted till the world ends to a new peak of No.3.

ADVERTISEMENT

S2: I’m Nicki Minaj, and that’s Kesha. I can’t take it.

S1: Never again, in all cases, these stunts worked on the charts because the new vocalists and rappers were grafted, however awkwardly onto the original recordings. Combined sales and airplay of both versions of each hit, original and remix counted for the Hot 100 under post J.Lo Billboard rules. As for Katy Perry after E.T., she now had a shot at the record books. Teenage Dream was with an asterisk given the non-album Kanye remix the first disc in years to generate as many as four number one hits. But only one act had ever pulled five number ones from an LP. The vaunted King of Pop,

S2: I’m standing with the.

S1: It had been more than two decades since Michael Jackson’s 1987 album Bad spawned five chart toppers. I just can’t stop loving you bad the way you make me feel man in the Mirror and Dirty Diana. In the 22 years since Dirty Diana gave Jackson that all important fifth number one, several stars had taken a run at that record. From George Michael to Paula Abdul to Michael’s sister Janet to Mariah Carey to Usher, all had pulled a foursome of number ones from their respective albums. But no one had managed to match Michael with five. Now it was Katy Perry’s turn, and she and capital had been holding onto a perky pop tune that they thought might do the trick. Song. Last Friday night, TGIF was an 80s party pop throwback, accompanied by a teen debauchery music video in homage to vintage John Hughes movies. When TGIF arrived on the Hot 100 in June 2011 and began climbing, it looked like Perry was headed straight for the top. But then by August last Friday night appeared to stall, stuck for three weeks at number two behind 2011’s Song of the summer El Ampharos party rock

S3: anthem Shake That.

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: Yeah. 2011 was a pretty frothy summer. Remember when we were that carefree? But I digress. In a final Hail Mary pass, Capital Records commissioned a late in the game remix of Last Friday night once again, as with E.T. and Kanye West. They went with a highly esteemed rapper, the great Missy Elliott. Missy led off the TGIF remix with, frankly, a pretty phoned in rap verse Black.

S3: And I can’t see so I can draw upon in my mind. I can sell him, but.

S1: This was clearly a desperation move by Team Perry. Remember, the E.T. remix was commissioned early before the Song was even a Top 40 hit. Adding Missy to TGIF in its 12th chart week was all about junking the stats and giving Perry her fifth number one. And well, it worked so. It’s time for the week ending August 27th, 2011. Katy Perry’s last Friday night, TGIF was the number one song in America. Interestingly, Billboard did not add Missy Elliott’s name to the track, since the Missy remix only accounted for about a quarter of the song’s digital downloads. Frankly, this was for the best. It would have been Elliott’s first ever Hot 100 No. One for a remix that was far from her best work. But that small bump in the song’s download sales and the fact that both mixes of the track counted for the same chart position gave capital what they craved for the first time since the summer of 1988, when Michael Jackson’s Dirty Diana rose to number one. An artist had pulled five number one singles with all sorts of asterisks from one album Perry’s teenage dream had tied Jackson’s bad for the Billboard record briefly. In case you’re wondering, yes. Capital did try to give Katy Perry a sixth number one from Teenage Dream, which would have given her the record all by herself in the fall of 2011. They began promoting the appropriately titled Dream Track The One That Got Away. And just before Christmas, in an equally craven maneuver, Team Perry issued a late breaking remix of the one that got away with then the hot rapper to be

ADVERTISEMENT

S3: on the phone. Reincarnation. Bring us back to the place we were last summer after high school when we first met. It didn’t

S1: work. The one that got away stalled at number three. And while Perry would in 2012 issue an expanded edition of Teenage Dream that generated a new number one called Part of me.

S2: Got a minute to.

S1: Billboard charts allergists did not count that chart topper toward her original album tally. Maybe they shouldn’t have counted the last two teenage dream. No one’s either. The tracks that were juiced by Kanye West and Missy Elliott feel free to debate this with your friends. We chart analysts will probably never settle that debate. In any case, Perry’s chart record was post J-Lo, the savviest use of remixes to conquer the charts. The Katy Perry late breaking remix stratagem became the chart fad of the 2010s. It was remarkably effective at turning second, third, fourth or fifth singles from ageing albums into chart topping smashes, enticing fans in the digital era to repurchase or stream a new version of a deep cut. They already knew, and it gave the label promotion team a story they could take to radio programmers. This isn’t an old track, the gambit implied. This is fresher, hipper, new and improved. What was a little depressing about the maneuver, however, were the intersectional implications. Bluntly put a whole lot of white pop stars were glomming onto credibility enhancing black performers. Mind you, this is the history of rock and pop in general. Even the Beatles in 1969 gave their first and only featured artist credit to the indisputably cool Billy Preston. But by the mid 10s, it was easy to believe that every white pop star needed a supporting black friend to pop on a remix and drive them back to number one. It was a recipe for crossover success in the streaming era.

ADVERTISEMENT

S3: But hey, I can’t take it back. Look where we went. Oh gee, I don’t remember that.

S1: Whether it was Taylor Swift and her mutual admirer, acclaimed rapper Kendrick Lamar, who climbed aboard her fourth single from her 1989 album Bad Blood, catapulting that song to number one in 2015. By the way, after Swift’s third single from the album, the superlative style underperformed

S3: because that we can. But you know, it used to be.

S1: Or Australian singer songwriter Iconoclast Sia, who scored her first number one hit as a performer when she added dancehall king Sean Paul to a remix of her 2016 single. Cheap Thrills,

S3: Joy Isley, Diamond,

S1: My Boy or pop rock band Maroon five, who livened up the fifth single from their languishing 2017 album Red Pill Blues by inviting rapper Cardi B onto a remix of Girls Like You. Ultimately, a 2018 number one hit

S3: only want white horse and a carriage? I think you wore white pussycat. I love you right here to. We thank you for your can, which at the top.

S1: Also, as with Jewel in the 90s, remixes in the 10s didn’t have to be uptempo on his own. Ed Sheeran managed to get his prom worthy ballad Perfect all the way up to number three in the late fall of 2017, before he called for backup.

S3: We were just kids when we first.

S2: Not knowing what it was

S1: then Katy Perry style, Sheeran deployed his secret weapon, a remix he called perfect duet, recasting his solo ballad as a pas de deux with Beyonce. How’s that for a special guest?

S3: We are still kids, but also in love fighting against all odds. I know it won’t be a

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: perfect duet was actually a rerecording, not just a remix, but it was chart legal to combine it with version one under billboard rules. Since the lead artist and his composition were the same, the duet remix vaulted perfect to number one the week of Christmas 2017 and Queen B received full artist credit because sales and streams of the Beyoncé duet overtook those of Sheeran’s solo version. More than half a dozen years after Katy Perry’s machinations, the final inning remix tactic still worked.

S3: I don’t deserve

S2: this. Darling, you look perfect.

S1: It is ironic to consider that Billboards Remix rule, which was developed to police Reboots like Jennifer Lopez is that were too different from the original song, was now compelling billboard to weigh in on how to dole out credit for remixes that change very little at all throughout the history of the remix. Critics, club denizens and hip hop heads have praised remixes that reinvent a song like, say, Beyonce’s widely acclaimed 2014 remix of her song Flawless that fundamentally changed the track’s sound and even added some of its most quoted lyrics.

S3: Sometimes shit go down. It’s a billion dollars on an elevator.

S1: Got down from the top. However, for most modern day hit makers and their labels, the object of the remix game is to ensure that just enough is changed on a remix to make it a little interesting, but not so much that billboard won’t count it. By the late 2010s, these remixes that didn’t travel far from their origins were oddly going where no hit had gone before setting all time chart records. Let’s consider a hit that I’ve mentioned on a couple of previous episodes of Hit Parade, the biggest Latin crossover single of all time.

ADVERTISEMENT

S3: But s.w.a.t speed has dwindled. Esposito can’t.

S1: Then you got those aside. As I noted in our Latin pop episode, San Juan balladeer Luis Fonsi had been a sizable star on Spanish language radio for about two decades. When he decided in 2016 to team up with the king of reggaeton daddy, Yankee Devi’s brand of Puerto Rican rap with a Jamaican Dumbo beat had overtaken all corners of Latin music over the prior decade. Fancy proposed to fuse his traditional balladry with De Y’s thumping beat for one monster hit

S3: on the Dunlop. Come back and do what I don’t call me Typekit,

S1: released at the start of 2017 that hit Despacito was an immediate smash, with Latin audiences topping charts in about a dozen Latin American countries, as well as Billboard’s Hot Latin Songs chart. But that’s when the story took its improbable, remix fueled turn.

S3: You fit me telling me, Love how you put it on the only you know how to turn it around.

S1: March of 2017. While on tour in Bogota, Colombia, Canadian pop megastar Justin Bieber heard Despacito and was captivated. Despite not speaking Spanish and having no Latin heritage, Bieber contacted Luis Fonsi, his management and asked if he could jump on a remix. And they agreed Fonsi was no dummy. He recalled that back in 1996, it took a partial English remix of Los del Rio’s Macarena to turn that Spanish language smash into an American pop blockbuster Mariah.

S3: When they call me my good

S2: enough and I say, OK, if they win anything now, I need

S1: a quick aside. If you haven’t yet listened to Slate’s one year podcast, I highly recommend their episode tracing the tangled remix fueled history of Macarena. We’ve dropped that episode into the hit parade feed, as you might say, a featured guest

S3: anyway

ADVERTISEMENT

S1: in the remix of Despacito. Not much changed. Justin Bieber harmonized with Luis Fonsi, mostly in phonetic Spanish. Bieber’s only English words came at the very beginning of the remix.

S3: Baby, take it slow, so making last to Terracini manager so.

S1: But that snippet of English was enough for Despacito to positively explode in the Anglo pop world. The week the Bieber remix dropped Despacito shot from number 48 to No.9 on the Hot 100. Three weeks later, it was number one, the first primarily Spanish Hot 100 chart topper since Macarena based side Boyz MCs 21 years earlier. Just not their best assessment

S3: seem to have anything to to. Don’t get started on my screen

S1: door with even more improbably, Despacito went on to spend a staggering 16 weeks on top of the Hot 100, tying the all time record for most weeks at number one. Which since 1996 had been held by Mariah Carey and Boyz to Men’s Mega Moralism,

S2: a ballad duet One Sweet Day in a Shiny.

S1: Despacito came exceedingly close to toppling one sweet day. Two years later, that Mariah boys chart record would finally be broken after 23 years. And again, remixes made the difference.

S3: I want to take my horse to water and I’m going, okay, right till I can’t not save this

S1: for Montero Lamar Hill a.k.a Lil Nas X and his now legendary smash. Old Town Road. He got it to No. One by himself. His two minute internet savvy Diddy, a fusion of twang and thump that Nas gave the bespoke genre name Country Trap, reached the top of the Hot 100 the week ending April 13th, 2019, credited only to Lil Nas X. No guests, no features, no remix. But that changed quickly. While Old Town Road was on the rise, Young Montero teamed with country music veteran Billy Ray Cyrus for a remix that deepened the song’s country vibe and extended its running time by about 40 percent in the remix. One of the best verses now belonged to Billy Ray

ADVERTISEMENT

S3: had down Krall’s Town, livin like a rock star. I spend a lot of money on my brand new guitar, so

S1: in its second week on top of the hot 100, the chart credit on Old Town Road switched from Lil Nas X to Lil Nas X featuring Billy Ray Cyrus. And why? Because the remix of Old Town Road had blown up the week the Cyrus Remix dropped it set an all time streaming record, a stunning 143 million U.S. streams in a single week, nearly 30 million higher than the previous record holder for streaming in My Feelings by Drake. By the way, that one week streaming record by Old Town Road still stands three years later.

S3: I wanna ride till I came

S1: by adding Billy Ray Cyrus Lil Nas X had reinforced the cross genre universality of Old Town Road, even though country radio stations still didn’t want to play it. The remix helped turn the song from a fluky hit into a cultural event, and of course, both versions of the song counted toward the charts as far as

S3: Billboard was concerned. Town wrote, I’m gonna ride til I can go

S1: for the next four months from April through August 2019. Old Town Road ran roughshod over the charts, locking down the number one spot and preventing several superstars from hitting the top, including new hits by Taylor Swift, Ed Sheeran and Post Malone, all of whom stalled at No.2 for a while. So did the breakthrough hit by 2019’s most buzzy new artist, Billie Eilish.

S3: I sure know it, but mostly. Yeah, yeah. To be told the

S1: bad guy, Eilish’s future Grammy winning record spent a total of nine weeks at number two on the Hot 100. Stuck behind Old Town Road sometime in mid-July, when Bad Guy was around its fifth week at number two. Eilish’s team at Interscope Records decided to fight fire with Fire

S3: Chief Mark Makris his first mob. I started the song back

S1: as a young girl. Billie Eilish had been a super fan of pop pinup Justin Bieber. Now she was a big enough deal to invite Justin onto a remix of Bad Guy. Critics complained that the Bieber remix was unimaginative and did nothing to improve the already great bad guy. But the remix didn’t have to be great. It just needed to refresh the song so fans would purchase it again and stream it in droves. Enough that bad guy would topple Old Town Road, which, by the way, was in its 15th week at number one, tantalizingly close to the one sweet day Despacito 16 week chart record close to us.

S3: I’ve been through all of my bromance, so I keep going by wish I

S1: could go home. But when word got back to Lil Nas X, that team Eilish was remixing her hit. And threatening a chart upset, he sprang back up into his saddle literally in the same 24 hours that the Bieber Bad Guy remix dropped, Team Nas issued a third version of Old Town Road. Its second remix with new verses from rapper Young Thug and 12 year old Mason Ramsey, who had gone viral on the interwebs that year as the so-called yodeling kid. Given the huge, prepubescent fan base of Old Town Road, Ramsay’s presence on this remix was savvy fans service on Nas Part.

S3: It can tell me nothing pop up in my razor that

S1: a thousand make the result. Old Town Road held on even though the Bieber remix of Bad Guy boosted its streams by nearly 40 percent and its download sales by more than 60 percent. It still wasn’t enough. Bad Guy remained stuck at number two, in part to celebrate his chart win and take a victory lap. Team Nas issued yet another remix of Road, this time adding rapper R.M. of K-pop sensations beats. They call that one Seoul Town Road. S e o u l. As in the capital of South Korea, I

S3: got the homies him by his word that he’s made still from Korea.

S1: By the way, this chart story had a happy ending for pretty much everyone. Old Town Road beat the one sweet day record two weeks later in its 17th week on top and went on to an 18th and the 19th week at number one F.. Why the name’s Mason Ramsey? Young Thug and R.E.M. were never added to the chart because those late remixes didn’t outsell or out. Stream the first remix with Billy Ray Cyrus, but they did contribute to the song’s long run. And when Lil Nas X finally succumbed in mid August 2019, replacing him at number one was Billie Eilish’s original version of Bad Guy. She got her chart topper anyway, with the superior O.G. mix of the Song. No offense Beeb’s

S3: The.

S1: Now in the 2020s, the Insta remix is such a well-established chart gambit, it’s become almost unremarkable, fuelling rises to no one by such hits as Megan Thee Stallion’s Savage remix featuring Beyonce. I mean,

S3: the one who spoke with me,

S1: Doja Cat, say so. Remix featuring Nicki Minaj.

S3: Every time I take a break, the game be so warm

S1: and a reboot of the weekend’s Save Your Tears as a duet with Ariana Grande that

S3: the two sons.

S1: In 2020, a viral ditty that spread on Tik Tok, an instrumental track by New Zealand teenager Josh six eight five that he called laxed siren beat. Was turned into a hit twice over first in a remix by mean jacking pop star Jason Derulo, who turned Josh’s hook into the song Savage Love. Just. And then in a remix of the remix by Beats, whose rabid fan base sent savage love laxed siren beat to number one on the Hot 100 savage love

S3: somebody supposed to break your heart.

S1: Even the top song of 2021, Dua Lipa’s levitating went through its own drama due to its remix. Her label, Warner Brothers, first got levitating onto the charts in late 2020 by commissioning a remix with rapper DaBaby. Come on back to me.

S3: I’m one of the greatest say not to be known.

S1: And then in 2021, when DaBaby made some stupid, homophobic comments while levitating was in the top 10, radio programmers and streaming listeners simply switched to the original album cut of Dua Lipa’s Levitating.

S3: I believe the energy is written in the stars, which

S1: compelled Billboard based on the data to remove the baby’s name from Dua Lipa’s chart entry. It was a rare instance of a smash remix on remixing itself on its way up the charts. Billboard later named Levitating the number one song of the year. The remix had come full circle. You might well have concluded from this hit parade episode that a lot of remixes are ephemeral, things tailored for their moment, but not built to last. Katy Perry’s remix with Missy Elliott, Billie Eilish’s remix with Justin Bieber, Dua Lipa’s remix with DaBaby Will anyone even remember these charts stoking promotional schemes decades later? Well, it depends, right? If a remix becomes the definitive version of a song, its legacy can go on for decades, especially for an act that’s nominated for the Rock and Roll

S3: Hall of Fame.

S1: Oh. I wanted to close this episode with some music by Duran Duran, primarily to celebrate them finally making the Rock Hall ballot for the very first time ever. And to remind my fellow rock hall voters to please check that box seriously. They really do deserve it. Also to point out that to this day, when the Fab Five play the Reflex live, they’re playing between

S2: the Reflex bass.

S1: Including the flap flap flex part Nile Rodgers added to the Song in 1984. By and large, Duran Duran listeners don’t think about the original LP version of the Reflex anymore. The remix is the Reflex because it’s better. It was an act of commerce, yes. The work of many cooks a means to an end, giving Duran Duran their number one hit. But like a Renoir or a Banksy, it remains a work of fine

S2: art time down.

S1: I hope you enjoyed this episode of Hit Parade. Our show was written, edited and narrated by Chris Molanphy. That’s me. My producer this month is Benjamin Frisch, and we also had help from Rosemary Bell’s June. Thomas is the senior managing producer, and Alicia Montgomery, the executive producer of Slate Podcasts. Check out their roster of shows at Slate.com slash podcasts. You can subscribe to Hit Parade wherever you get your podcasts. In addition to finding it in the Slate Culture Feed, if you’re subscribing on Apple Podcasts, please rate and review us while you’re there. It helps other listeners find the show. Thanks for listening, and I look forward to leading the hit parade back your way. Until then, keep on marching on this one. I’m Chris Molanphy

S2: George. Y yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, right, right, right, yeah, yeah, right, yeah. Why, why I don’t you?

Transcript - The “Polls Do Not Look Amazing For Democrats” Edition
Discover
My Ex-Husband “Punished” Our 5-Year-Old for Disco vering His Affair. I’m Livid.
Discover
AdvisorBooth | Buick Envista
|
Sponsored by Taboola
Buick Envista Tailored For Seniors - Take A Closer Look!
Read More
Skip
My Roommate Just Admitted She Has Hated Me For a Year. Her Reason Is Nonsensical.
Discover
My Daughter Did a Favor for a Popular Girl at School. Her Brother Told Me How It Ended.
Discover
MD Reveals: Skin Looks Years Younger When You Eat This Daily
Top doctor urges aging seniors to eat this for aging skin
Gundry MD
|
Sponsored
Learn More
Cinnamon: The Greatest Enemy of Blood Sugar
Magazine Glyco
|
Sponsored
Learn More
The Greatest Enemy of Blood Sugar? Try This Tonight!
Magazine Glyco
|
Sponsored
Learn More
Here's What A Walk-In Shower Should Cost
Brilliant custom solutions for every budget.
Kohler Showers
|
Sponsored
Learn More
Cinnamon: The Greatest Enemy Of Blood Sugar (See How To Use It)
See this amazing trick rigth now!
bloghealthnet
|
Sponsored
Learn More
Mix 4 Kitchen Ingredients, Wake Up Thinner Every Morning
Health Now
|
Sponsored
Cinnamon: The Hidden Blood Sugar Enemy? Try This Tonight!
Cinnamon Help
|
Sponsored
Learn More
Thousands Are Dumping Their Hearing Aids for This Game-Changer
See why audiologists are calling it a breakthr ough in hearing technology.
hear.com
|
Sponsored
Using Glucometer? See The main Enemy of Sugar Spikes
harmonyessencehub
|
Sponsored
Discover Effortless Glucose Monitoring: Request a Free Trial
Dexcom G7 Is Easy To Use and Easy To Get Started. Simply Sign Up For A Free 10-Day Trial Today.
Dexcom
|
Sponsored
Try Now
The Salt You Already Have at Home Might Be a Weight Loss Ally
Lisamega
|
Sponsored
Learn More
Men Over 50: Tired of Frequent Urges and Weak Flow? Try This 30-Second...
Enlarged Prostate Has Nothing To Do With Age: Just Stop Doing This One Common...
healthydayscare
|
Sponsored
Click Here
Pink Salt for Weight Loss? Sounds Crazy, But It’s Catching On
Lisamega
|
Sponsored
Learn More
There’s a Strange Reason Your Graduation Photos Are So Expensive
My Sister Took My Daughter to the Mall. My Wife Is Livid at the Condition She Returned Her In.
Dexcom G7 is proven to lower A1C and increase time in range³⁻⁷.
Dexcom G7 shows your glucose in real time, so you can make more informed decisions,...
Dexcom
|
Sponsored
Over 50 and Going Too Often? Here's a Bedtime Routine That Might Help
Enlarged Prostate Has Nothing To Do With Age: Just Stop Doing This One Common...
healthydayscare
|
Sponsored
Click Here
4 Ways Japanese People Use Himalayan Salt to Lose Weight
Nutrition With Pink Salt
|
Sponsored
Learn More
3 Ways Japanese People Use Pink Salt to Lose Weight
Nutrition With Pink Salt
|
Sponsored
Learn More
MOST POPULAR
Slate Crossword: Paloma Picasso’s Dad (Five Letters)
MOST POPULAR
It’s Becoming Clearer What Trump Really Wants From Russia
Unlock a Phone Deal (See How)
Discover Amazing Phone Deals. Get The Latest Models At Unbeatable Prices
Qsearch | Search Ads
|
Sponsored
View Deals
2025 Market Forecasts
Market Forecasts | Search Ads
|
Sponsored
Learn More
Detroit: Unsold Cars with Zero Miles: Get Them Dirt Cheap (See Deals)
GoSearches | Search Ads
|
Sponsored