HIT PARADE
And the Grammy Goes to… Edition
JAN 13, 202412:14 PM
Better Life Lab is a partnership of Slate and New America.
LISTEN TO THIS EPISODE

Speaker A: Welcome to Hit Parade, a podcast of pop chart history from Slate magazine about the hits from coast to coast. I’m Chris Malanfi, chart analyst, pop critic.

Speaker B: And writer of Slate’s why is this.

Speaker A: Song number one series on today’s show? In a little over three weeks, this song and the album it comes from will be competing for prizes on the 66th annual edition of the Grammy Awards. The artist is Solana Imani Rowe, better known as SZA. Her song, a number one smash on Billboard’s Hot 100 last spring, is Kill Bill, and it’s from her blockbuster number one album, SOS. And if by some chance scissor sweeps all nine prizes she’s up for, she will set a new record for most grammys won in a single night.

Speaker C: I might kill my next out I get here.

There’s a Strange Reason Your Graduation Photos Are So Expensive
Read More

Speaker A: Now that’s a tall order, especially given Grammy history. A certain type of artist and recording tends to sweep the Recording Academy’s prizes, something espousing traditional pop values a little less hip. In case you’re curious, the album that won the most grammys in a single night was from this smooth act nearly a quarter century ago, week number one.

Speaker B: On Billboard’s Hot 100.

Speaker A: That took home record and song of the year at the 42nd edition of the Grammy Awards in 2000, and the album, credited to Santana, the rock band led by guitar God Carlos Santana, plus an army of special guests, was called Supernatural. That night in Los Angeles, Supernatural won a staggering nine grammys, eight of them won by Carlos himself.

Speaker C: This library could my world to lift you up.

Speaker A: I can picture some of you nodding and maybe a few more of you groaning. Supernatural by Santana, the winningest Grammy album of all time that’s both totally plausible and numbingly predictable. Maybe you preferred Santana’s competition that night in the big categories, all by artists younger than Carlos Santana. Whether it was boy band King’s the.

Speaker C: Backstreet Boys, I wanted that way. Tell me why.

Speaker A: Multi platinum r and B trio TLC.

Speaker C: I don’t want no scrub. A scrub is a dad I can’t get from the passenger side of the.

Speaker A: Desperate, diamond selling country trio the chicks.

Speaker B: Then known as the Dixie Chicks.

ADVERTISEMENT

Speaker C: Cowboy take me away that is through as high as you can into or.

Speaker A: In the record and song categories. Latin pop God turned anglo pop hitmaker Ricky Martin. But speaking as a critic and a longtime, often frustrated Grammy watcher, on the scale of Grammy sweeps, I’d say Santana’s was far from the most egregious. Though this Clive Davis Svengalied album seemed machine tooled to win Grammys, and it was. Supernatural was a blockbuster album. It earned respectful, if not stellar reviews. It captured the moment in 1999 when latin pop was going mainstream. And it did spin off massive hits, not just at adult contemporary or rock stations, but at top 40 pop stations, the ones listened to by teens and tweens.

Speaker C: She’s gonna love in me sound.

Speaker A: As they say, grammys gonna Grammy. Santana’s sweep in 2000 was, let’s call it the median Grammy win. Not the most exciting, not the most offensive. A relatively credible consensus when it comes to the Recording academy. Relatively credible is a win. Because, man, there have been some head.

Speaker D: Scratchers stepping out with my baby can’t go wrong because I’m in, right? Ask me when will that date?

Speaker A: There have been big Grammy wins by artists long past their prime.

Speaker C: Well, we used to play when we were three. How about a kiss on your cousin Dupree?

Speaker E: How about a kiss on your records.

Speaker A: That became semi famous only after they won the Grammy?

Speaker C: I just need you. Come on now mention when I was.

Speaker A: A little country boy and just occasionally there are acts who win the Grammy at exactly the right moment but still.

Speaker C: Haven’T found what I’m looking for.

ADVERTISEMENT

Speaker A: Who then win it again years later, whether they need it or not. Repeat winners are an old Grammy trope.

Speaker C: Hello? Not a place over.

Speaker D: It’s everything I wish I didn’t know.

Speaker A: The Recording Academy claims it only considers artistic merit when awarding prizes. But throughout Grammy history, many of the most celebrated awards went to blockbuster albums.

Speaker C: You can go your own way. You can call it.

Speaker A: We at hit parade are not against this team. Grammy is better at coronation than cool hunting. We only wish the Grammys consistently coronated the right top kings and queens.

Speaker C: You won’t break my soul? You won’t break my soul? You won’t break my soul? You won’t break my soul?

Speaker A: And unlike most Grammy watchers who are grumbling at the telecast every year, we have, as the kids say, the receipts, the chart data to measure just how culturally relevant a Grammy is. So today, on hit parade, with the awards just around the corner, we will try to explain why the Grammys are both fun and frustrating, how closely they align with the charts, and how, when and why they get it right and wrong.

Speaker D: Y’all don’t want to hear me?

Speaker C: You just don’t dance? Oh, don’t want to meet your.

Speaker A: Before we break it all down, let’s raise a glass to what was perhaps the most beloved Grammy streak of all time. The moment when a singular, wondrous artist went three for three in just four years. And nobody complained. Well, except maybe Paul Simon.

Speaker C: Vacant feeling I love.

Speaker D: The vacant feelings.

Speaker C: I love.

ADVERTISEMENT

Speaker A: And that’s where your hit parade marches today. The week ending February 19, 1977, when songs in the key of Life became Stevie Wonder’s third consecutive album of the year winner at the Grammy Awards. After spending 19 straight weeks in the top three on the Billboard album chart, 14 of those weeks at number one, the Grammy Awards had never seemed more relevant, populist and on trend, a streak the recording academy would maintain for most of the next decade until the monoculture broke down and the Grammys grasped for direction. When did they lose the plot? Did they ever have it, and did they ever get it back? And how can the Grammys stay relevant if they even should? There are no hard and fast rules for good Grammy governance. But that doesn’t mean we can’t try to provide our own chart nerdy advice for music’s biggest night.

Speaker C: You can feel it. All of our people.

Speaker B: Whether you are.

Speaker A: An avid Grammy follower or a detractor, calling a Grammy win credible is in the eye of the beholder. It’s more art than science. For example, let’s first consider what is arguably the most celebrated Grammy winning album of the year of all time. Bonnie rates Nick of time. I say celebrated not because raight won.

Speaker B: The most Grammys in 1990, the night.

Speaker A: She took album of the year. As I said at the top of our show. Carlos Santana won more on his big night, and other winners like Michael Jackson’s thriller or Nora Jones’s Come Away with.

Speaker B: Me won more as well.

Speaker A: No, what I mean is Nick of Time is the Recording Academy’s best Cinderella story, the album that changed an act’s career most profoundly, including on the charts. You can literally divide Bonnie Wright’s career into before she won the Grammy and.

Speaker B: After she won the Grammy.

Speaker C: She’s scared. Scared to run out of time.

ADVERTISEMENT

Speaker A: Released in 1989, nick of Time was Bonnie Wright’s 10th studio album. The singer and blues rock guitarist had been toiling away since the early 70s, never scoring a top 40 pop hit or a top 20 lp.

Speaker B: She had battled drug and alcohol addiction.

Speaker A: Got sober in the late eighty s and signed to a new label, Capital Records, just before rate’s 40th birthday. Capital managed to get rate on adult contemporary radio and pushed the nick of Time album into the top 30. In the summer of 89. The lp went gold, and by Grammy night 1990 was on its way to platinum. Not bad at all.

Speaker E: And then and now, the album of the year.

Speaker C: Oh, nick of Time produced the Don Zack. I can never get over this as long as I live. Thank you so much from the bottom of my heart.

Speaker A: Five weeks after Bonnie Wright’s Grammy triumph, nick of Time climbed to number one on the Billboard album chart. It eventually went quintuple platinum.

Speaker C: Are you ready for the bank? I love don’t come to me.

Speaker A: Bonnie Rate never missed the album charts top 20 with a studio album ever again, and several of her 90s albums reached number one or number two. Winning a Grammy rebooted Ray’s career and turned her into a pop star at age 40. She even started scoring top 40 hits.

Speaker C: Something we don’t darling, let’s give them something to talk about. Something to talk about.

Speaker A: It would be churlish to begrudge rate any of this. Her Grammy win was basically an unqualified good thing for her, for pop music, and for the awards themselves. Now let’s skip ahead a quarter century to the Grammys of 2015. That year’s album of the year winner was at a similar juncture of his career, but the win was far less celebrated. It Morning Phase was the 12th studio album by Beck, issued as he just turned 44. Like Bonnie rate, Beck had been plying his trade for two decades, somewhere between obscurity and megastardom. But that night, as music legend Prince announced Beck’s win, a small uproar arose on the telecast, and the winner is.

Speaker D: Morning phase.

Speaker C: Beck producer Beck Hansen.

Speaker D: I need some help. Come back.

ADVERTISEMENT

Speaker A: That sound you just heard. For just a few seconds, Kanye west climbed to the stage, threatening to do to Beck what he’d done six years earlier to Taylor Swift at the MTV Video Music Awards, protest the win. This time ye thought better of it, did not take the mic and returned to his seat. And why was Kanye so exorcised about Beck’s win? Because Beck had just beaten Beyonce.

Speaker C: Can’t keep your eyes off my bed drunk in love, we woke up at a kitchen.

Speaker A: Beyonce’s game changing, self titled 2013 album, the one that, as we discussed in a prior hit parade episode, had invented. The surprise album drop, lost the album of the year Grammy to Beck. It would be the first of three consecutive album of the year nominations for Beyonce that would not turn into a win in 2015. Queen B’s universally acclaimed fifth album had been beaten by Beck’s modestly successful 12th lp.

Speaker C: Tries to run trouble when it comes both.

Speaker A: What happened? Why was Beck’s triumph not as embraced as Bonnie rates 25 years earlier? Okay, mostly it’s the Beyonce factor. And let’s add the caveat that all Kanye west opinions should be taken with a huge grain of salt. But why was there enough goodwill for Beck among Grammy voters and such indifference, bordering on contempt among the general public? Why did the morning phase win feel.

Speaker B: Like such a meh?

Speaker A: Chart patterns, I would argue, provide some clues. Beck’s Morning phase had been a modest hit. It opened at number three on the Billboard 200 album chart in early 2014, fueled by Beck’s loyal fan base. Then it tumbled. It was off the album chart entirely by the time Beck won the Grammy the following February. In prior years, Beck had been nominated for much Hipper albums like 1990 Nine’s Midnight Vultures or his 1996 breakthrough O Delay.

Speaker D: Got a devil in my mind got a devil.

Speaker A: These albums did not win the big.

Speaker B: Prize, but they are the discs that.

ADVERTISEMENT

Speaker A: Won Beck new fans. It is doubtful Beck won many new fans on Morning phase. His albums didn’t chart better after the big Grammy win. Beck won that Grammy in 2015, likely because he was old enough to be respectable, and he was the token rock nominee in an album of the year ballot that also featured Beyonce, Ed Sheeran, Sam Smith and Pharrell Williams. That night, Beck felt like the default choice, whereas don’t come for me and.

Speaker C: You know are you ready for when.

Speaker A: Bonnie Rate won in 1990, nick of Time had been on the Billboard album chart for ten months straight, but had never climbed higher than number 22. Bonnie rate felt like a discovery in 1990, yet she was popular enough on the charts and the radio not to feel like Grammy voters were being contrarian or obscure. Even though she was 40, Bonnie Wright’s win was the right blend of cultural relevance and relative freshness for the 44 year old Beck. Winning the big Grammy turned a once hip artist into a hidebound veteran. See what I mean when I say there are no hard and fast rules when it comes to credible Grammy wins. It’s a balance of charts and art of the Recording Academy. Reading the room in this episode, I’m going to use both chart data and Grammy history to provide subjective guidelines for the Grammys, more or less how I would vote if I were a voter. By the way, full disclosure while I am a balladed rock and roll hall of Fame voter, I am not a member of the Recording Academy. And while I one time attended the Grammys, I have never voted for them. As a critic, I have a perhaps unorthodox opinion about the Grammys. I am in favor of them existing. It’s natural for people in the arts to want to reward their own. And as shown by the many other awards shows, if the Grammys didn’t exist, someone else would have created them. But here’s my hot take. I feel the Grammys are best when they reward consensus music, songs and albums that are of quality, but also, yes, popular. Watching the Grammys, you shouldn’t necessarily love the big winners, but you should be able to say, yeah, okay, that guy gal song or album won for a reason.

ADVERTISEMENT

Speaker D: And the Grammy goes to no surprise. Rolling in the deep adele.

Speaker A: To be clear, I don’t mean the recording academy should always give their golden Gramophones to whatever was biggest on the Billboard charts in any given year. After all, that’s what the Billboard music awards are for, and those have been around for most of the last 35 years. A couple of months ago, the BBMAs dropped a pile of statuettes on 2023 chart dominators Taylor Swift and Morgan Wallen.

Speaker C: I know that last night we let the liquor talk.

Speaker D: I can’t remember everything we said, but we said it.

Speaker A: That said, the Grammys have aligned with the charts a lot over their 65 year existence. Since its founding in 1957 and its first awards show in 1959, the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences, or Naris, has claimed its awards are based only on artistic merit. Indeed, the original Grammy credo circulated at the awards founding in 1958, stated, quote, sales and mass popularity are the yardsticks of the record business. They are not the yardsticks of this academy. Unquote. Now, two things you need to know about that foundation. First, whatever their credo said, the Grammys always rewarded chart topping music. And second, they were founded by people who hated rock and roll and wanted to reward anything.

Speaker E: But according to Henry Shipper’s book broken record, the inside story of the Grammy Awards, Narras created the Grammys to, quote, clean up and gentrify pop. The awards would reward artistry and excellence, buzzwords for people like Frank Sinatra and Ella Fitzgerald, while paying no heed to top selling rock and R B. Teens might make Elvis the king, but the Grammys would give industry experts a chance to tell the world what they thought was good. Unquote.

ADVERTISEMENT

Speaker D: I’m proud to say that she’s my b*** I’m in love, I’m all shook up.

Speaker E: So because the academy’s founders thought that rock was, quote, a passing fad at first, they didn’t even create a Grammy. Subcategory for rock, jazz, classical, pop, country, Broadway, movie soundtracks, even comedy and children’s music had Grammy Award categories but no rock and roll. They did create one award for r.

Speaker B: And b at the first Grammys, held.

Speaker E: In May 1959 in a ballroom at the Beverly Hilton Hotel, complete with a catered dinner. Crooning legend Frank Sinatra was the most conspicuous presence. He’d bought two tables for his rat Pack friends. Frank was convinced he was going to clean up. He’d been nominated for five Grammys, including two nominations in the album of the year category and a record of the year nomination for Witchcraft.

Speaker D: Wicked Witchcraft.

Speaker E: But that night, Sinatra came away with almost nothing, winning only an album packaging.

Speaker B: Award for his lp.

Speaker E: Only the Lonely and not a single performance Grammy record of the year and song of the year went instead to Eurovision crooner Domenico Modunio’s Volade, which, by the way, was Billboard’s number one year end hit of 1958 vol. And similarly, the album of the year prize went to composer Henry Mancini for his smash tv soundtrack, the music from Peter Gun. It would wind up Billboard’s top selling lp of 1959. So much for those purest Grammy voters. Ignoring mass popularity yardsticks, Sinatra was reportedly furious. Don’t feel too bad for Frank. Sinatra would go on to win album of the year three times over the next decade, and not always with his best work. Come Dance with me and September of my years were solid Sinatra offerings. A man and his music, however, on which Frank re recorded his old standards, Taylor’s version style probably shouldn’t have won.

ADVERTISEMENT

Speaker D: Love and marriage, love and marriage they go together like a horse and carriage this I’ll tell you, brother, you can’t have one without.

Speaker E: For most of the Grammy’s first decade, voters seemed to be paying close attention to the charts and voting accordingly. No matter what was selling, comedy albums took home the big prize in both 1961 and 63, the first and last times that’s ever happened in an era when comedy lps were big business.

Speaker C: How fast were you going when Mr.

Speaker B: Adams jumped from the car?

Speaker C: 75. And where was that? In your driveway?

Speaker E: The button down mind of Bob Newhart spent 14 weeks at number one on the lp chart in 1960. More than any other album that year, it was still number one just weeks before Newhart won album of the year in 61. Two years later, the same prize was won by John F. Kennedy impersonator von Meader for his instantly dated Curio, the first family. That album spent a dozen weeks at number one in 1962 and 63.

Speaker C: I noticed that you didn’t touch your salad either at dinner tonight or at dinner last night. Would you tell us why, please?

Speaker D: Well, let me say this about that. Now, number one, in my opinion, the fault does not lie as much with the salad as it does with the dressing being used on the salad.

Speaker E: Now, let me say even as the academy was avoiding rock, if any young act broke through with old school music, Grammy voters eagerly rewarded it. At age 22, Barbara Streisand won album of the year on her very first try with the Barbara Streisand album, a number eight hit lp that sold a million copies to both young and old.

Speaker C: Happy days are here again.

ADVERTISEMENT

Speaker E: A year later, the Grammys looked fairly hip, giving the top prize to Getz Gilberto, a collaborative lp by jazz saxophonist Stan Getz and Bosanova King Zhao Gilberto that reached number two on the album chart thanks to the top five easy listening cocktail lounge classic the Girl from.

Speaker C: Epanima and ten and young and lovely, the girl from Epanim goes walking and when she passes his smiles but she doesn’t see.

Speaker E: The early 60s launch of the best new artist prize, the only Grammy that rewards an artist, not a recording, gave the academy another way to glom onto young performers with music the voters could comprehend. Early winners of the prize included Bobby Darren, Robert Goulet and Tom Jones.

Speaker D: What’s new pussycat whoa, whoa, whoa watch new Pussycat.

Speaker E: And speaking of lounge music, the mid 60s rise of trumpet King Herb Alpert, whom we covered in depth in our instrumental hits episode of Hip Parade, gave the Grammys another way to seem with it. Albert’s brassy, ring a ding dinging cover of the pop standard, a Taste of Honey, a number seven hit in 1965, took 1960 six’s record of the year prize. Through 1966, the Grammys had been largely avoiding the Beatles. They did give best new artist to the group in 1965, a mild acknowledgment of beatle mania. But it took a few years for a Beatles recording to be recognized in a major category. When one finally did win, it was classic Grammys. Paul McCartney’s francophone soft pop trifle. Michelle won the 1967 song of the year because it was a songwriting prize, and John Lennon was credited as co writing the McCartney Diddy. John won alongside Paul Michelle, my bell.

Speaker D: These are words that go together well, my Michelle.

ADVERTISEMENT

Speaker E: As for albums, the Beatles lost twice to Frank Sinatra before finally winning in 1968. The lp that finally got the Fab Four past Sinatra was. Well, you can probably guess. It figures that the Beatles bid for adult respectability. The legendary Sergeant Pepper’s Lonely Hearts club band finally took album of the year. Moreover, as seminal as that lp was in the shift of pop promotion from singles to albums, Sergeant Pepper also seemed to bring the Grammys somewhat up to date. Over the next two decades, the Recording Academy would edge closer to the pop mainstream.

Speaker C: Without defenders.

Speaker E: The question was, did the Grammys become hipper, or did pop in the 70s get softer? More the latter than the former. But to give the Recording Academy some meager credit, they stopped avoiding youth directed pop records. Of course, it was easier to be on trend when the pop mainstream sounded.

Speaker C: Like this and pain is all around.

Speaker E: Like a bridge, Simon and Garfunkel’s bridge over troubled water. The LP and its title track were Billboard’s top album and single of 1970, and accordingly, they swept the album, record and Song of the Year prizes at the 1971 Grammys or in 1971 and.

Speaker C: It’S too late, baby, now it’s too late. Though we really did try to make.

Speaker E: It something inside Carol King’s tapestry, the longest running number one lp of that year swept the Grammys in 1972, Album of the year plus record of the year for it’s too late and song of the year for King’s composition, you’ve got a friend. Sure, these records were mellow and easy to like, but they were also massive hits. The following two years, both record and Song of the Year were won by Roberta Flack Recordings the first time ever I saw your face. 1970 two’s top Billboard hit swept at the 1973 Grammys and killing me softly with his song a four week number one in 73 cleaned up at the 74 Grammys.

ADVERTISEMENT

Speaker C: Singing my life with his word, killing me softly with his song killing me softly with his song Roberta.

Speaker E: Flax twofer rolled right into Stevie Wonder’s three peat starting at the 1974 Grammy show. As we discussed in our Stevie Wonder episode of hit Parade, the Grammys were both good to and good for Stevie, boosting his profile with each win. 1970 three’s superlative inner visions, a number four Billboard album, took album of the year in 74 but don’t you worry.

Speaker D: About a thing, don’t you worry about a thing, mama.

Speaker E: Then that summer, Wonder dropped his follow up lp fulfillingness first finale, and this time the momentum from the Grammy win sent the album to number one and then, fulfilling this, won the top prize at the 75 Grammy Awards.

Speaker D: What a strong.

Speaker E: 18 months later when Wonder belatedly delivered his double lp magnum opus, songs in the key of life. The album opened on the charts at number one, a first for Stevie Wonder, and of course, took the Grammy the following winter. The only artist not exactly rooting for Stevie was Paul Simon, whose chart topping 1975 lp, still crazy after all these years, took advantage of Wonder’s two year gap between albums to win 1970 six’s album of the year. At the ceremony, Simon offered Wonder thanks with a little side of shape.

Speaker D: And most of all, I like to thank Stevie Wonder, who didn’t make an album this year.

Speaker E: Now, to be sure, the Grammys were still rewarding plenty of middle of the road schlock. Perhaps most notorious, the same year songs in the key of life took album of the year best new artist went to infamous one hit wonder act, the Starland Vocal band, Purveyors of the icky afternoon Delight, a song about midday sex that sounds like it was written by.

Speaker C: Your parents skyrocketing flight, afternoon delight.

ADVERTISEMENT

Speaker E: For the record, the Starlanders weren’t even all that happy to win the prize. Vocalist Tappy Nivert later called the best new artist prize, quote the kiss of death, unquote. After the win, the Starland vocal band never hit the charts again, and that year’s song of the year went to the gooey I write the songs.

Speaker C: I write the song that make the whole world.

Speaker E: Even if you are a Barry Manilow fan. That song, contrary to its title, wasn’t penned by Manilow himself. So no statue for Barry. A weird trivia point. The winning songwriter was moonlighting Beach Boys member Bruce Johnston. Go figure. So yeah, the song and best new artist prizes were frequently dubious in the 70s. But if an album was culturally ubiquitous enough, Grammy voters dutifully and rightfully punched its ticket, including the hit packed rumors by Fleetwood Mac, a 31 week number one album in 1978 and, briefly, the best selling album of all time. It won in 1979.

Speaker C: Staying alive, staying alive, staying alive.

Speaker E: And five years later, the lp that finally outsold both rumors and Saturday Night Fever and spent 37 weeks at number one, Michael Jackson’s thriller, took home eight grammys in a single night.

Speaker C: Just beat it, just beat it.

Speaker E: The 80s, too, was a decade dominated by monocultural Grammy winning albums. The two most controversial winners of that decade, both discussed in our yacht rock episode of Hit Parade, were Christopher Cross’s self titled debut album, which swept the top four grammys in 1981, including best new artist for Cross himself.

Speaker C: Sailing, take.

Speaker D: Me way to where I.

Speaker E: And Toto’s.

Speaker B: Toto four, which took album of the.

ADVERTISEMENT

Speaker E: Year at the 1983 grammys, as well as record of the year for Rosanna.

Speaker C: She went Rosanna.

Speaker D: Now she’s gone.

Speaker E: If you read the rock press during the 1980s in any piece critiquing the grammys, and there were many, Christopher Cross’s sweep and Toto’s wins were exhibits a and b of the Recording Academy’s out of touchness. To be fair, both lps were enormously popular. The Christopher Cross album went quintuple platinum spawned huge hits, including the number two ride like the wind and the number one sailing, and spent more than two years on Billboard’s top lps chart. And Toto four went triple platinum and produced not only the number two Rosanna but also the number one Africa, which was sitting atop the hot 100 just two weeks before the 1983 Grammy telecast. Where Toto won’t in later generations. The rehabilitation of both yacht rock as music and Africa in particular among millennials and Gen Z make these wins seem somewhat less egregious. Now, on the other hand, the critics had a point that the maddening thing about the Grammys was what the academy honed in on among the array of popular choices at the 1985 show, for example, which rewarded the music of 1984 and late 83. Among the stellar album of the year nominees were Prince’s Purple Rain, Cindy Lauper’s she’s so unusual, Bruce Springsteen’s Born in the USA and Tina Turner’s private dancer. Not bad, right? And what did the Grammy voters choose? Lionel Ritchie’s yuppie soul blockbuster can’t slow.

Speaker B: Down hello.

Speaker D: Is it me you looking for?

Speaker C: I can see it in your eyes.

Speaker E: Richie’s lp was a smash, equaling or exceeding the sales of any of his fellow nominees and generating just as many culture blanketing hits. But Ritchie was also the kind of smooth showman the Academy’s elders found legible. Grammys gonna Grammy. Still, the 80s were about as monoculturally acceptable a decade for the Grammys as the 70s had been, with several consensus recordings taking big prizes, whether it was Paul Simon’s afro pop meets western pop masterpiece Graceland, which took album of the year in 1987.

ADVERTISEMENT

Speaker C: I’m going Graceland Memphis, Tennessee I’m going to Graceland.

Speaker E: U two’s mainstream pop rock breakthrough the Joshua Tree, which took the prize in 1988.

Speaker C: Without you we go without you I.

Speaker E: Can live or George Michael’s solo debut Away from Wham, the blockbuster Faith, winner for 1989.

Speaker C: Because I gotta have faith I gotta have faith because I got to face I got to have a faith.

Speaker E: The same year Faith won, the academy had an opportunity to reward Tracy Chapman’s enduring fast car in both the record and song of the year categories. And they did wisely give Chapman the best new artist prize.

Speaker D: I remember when we were driving driving in your car speed so fast it felt like I was drunk did it like day out before senior arm feeling.

Speaker B: Like crap round my but in the.

Speaker E: Two big song categories, recording Academy voters went instead with acapella master Bobby McFerron’s fluke number one hit don’t worry, be.

Speaker B: Happy Grammy strikes again, you worry, you make it double.

Speaker D: Don’t worry, be happy don’t worry, be happy now.

Speaker E: Still, for two decades, even when Grammy voters were making dubious choices, they were focusing on current sounding hits that would begin to change. I’d argue, not for the better. As the Grammys moved into the century.

Speaker B: Entering the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences was reeling from its biggest ever scandal, the 1990 rescinding of the best new artist prize from fraudulent hip hop vocal duo Millie Vanilli, which we discussed in depth in a prior episode of Hit Parade.

Speaker C: Blame it on the rain that was falling, falling, blame it on the star.

ADVERTISEMENT

Speaker B: With the Grammys very existence called into question after this scandal, Naris began to retrench. The 1991 Grammys were swept by veteran producer Quincy Jones with his multiartist album.

Speaker A: Back on the block.

Speaker B: And then they went even more old school. At the awards of 1992, after a year when alternative rock was on the rise and Rem and Nirvana were topping the charts, the Grammys went fully pre rock, with a pile of Grammys for Natalie Cole, daughter of the late Nat King Cole.

Speaker D: That’s what you are.

Speaker C: Unforgettable.

Speaker B: On the album Unforgettable with Love, Natalie sang standards made famous by her father. The CD culminated in a duet version of the song Unforgettable, sung by Natalie and the ghostly voice of the deceased Nat.

Speaker A: The Academy showered the album with prizes.

Speaker B: Most dubiously, they gave unforgettable the song not only record of the year for the eerie recording feat, but also song of the year for a tune that had been written by Irving Gordon in 1951. With this prize, the Recording Academy was effectively claiming that no composition actually written in 1991 was worthy of a Grammy.

Speaker D: That’s why, darling, it’s incredible that someone.

Speaker B: So unforgettable in 1993, the Grammys latched onto the unplugged fad that had taken MTV by storm, and the first major beneficiary was guitarist Eric Clapton. Having previously rewarded Clapton little for his output, he did share credit for 1973 Album of the Year, the Concert for Bangladesh, a George Harrison project, the Academy in 1993 rectified the oversight to an extreme degree, showering Clapton with six statues on the night for some of his sleepiest work, including a slowed down cover of his fiery Derek and the dominoes hit Layla. To be fair to Clapton, both his unplugged album and the Unplugged Layla were big chart hits even before he won all those grammys. That was not the case two years later, when the album of the year went to a much larkier MTV unplugged CD by veteran crooner Tony Bennett.

Speaker D: It had to be you.

ADVERTISEMENT

Speaker B: Bennett’s collection of great American Songbook standards performed on the MTV Unplugged stage, had barely scraped the top 70 on the Billboard 200 during its 1994 chart run. In a year dominated by the likes of Green Day, TLC and Snoop Dogg, the Academy nominated not only Bennett’s unplugged album but an all blues album by Clapton and a live album by operatic singing trio, the three tenors that even classical aficionados considered a novelty record. When Tony Bennett won over that meager competition, his album became the lowest charting album of the year winner in Grammy history to date.

Speaker D: Stepping out with my baby can’t go wrong because I’m in right ask me when will that day be.

Speaker B: After widespread grumbling about the 1995 results not only among critics but academy members as well, the president of the Academy took action before 1996, installing nominating committees to review Academy members selections and ensure that some more current music got nominated for the record. While most critics and some artists came to regard the review committees as corrupt, your hit parade host is a contrarian. I felt the committees saved NARAS members.

Speaker A: From their own worst impulses.

Speaker B: Some of the better Grammy nominees after 1995 were likely the work of the committees. They were eventually disbanded in 2021 anyway. In 1996, after the nomination committees were.

Speaker A: Installed, the results were felt right away.

Speaker B: That year’s album of the year nominees were Mariah Carey, Michael Jackson, Joan Osborne, Pearl Jam and Alanis Morissette, whose chart dominating blockbuster jagged little pill took the prize.

Speaker C: And I’m here to remind you of the mess you left when you went away. It’s not fair.

ADVERTISEMENT

Speaker B: Two years after that, a hip hop album won album of the year for the first time. When the miseducation of Lauren Hill went all the way.

Speaker C: You know you better watch out.

Speaker B: Of course, Lauryn Hill’s superlative disc is as much a singing album as a rapping album, which brings up another Grammy bugaboo, the Academy’s perpetual slights of rap music. Once rock became the establishment, rap became the music. The Grammys held at arm’s length 200 more times.

Speaker D: But to you other kids all across the land, there’s no need to argue parents just don’t understand.

Speaker B: Rap’s presence at the Grammys began inauspiciously in 1989, when a best rap performance Grammy was introduced and DJ Jazzy Jeff and the Fresh Prince’s novelty hit parents just don’t understand took the inaugural prize. The new Rap award was not televised and Jeff and Fresh Prince Will Smith led a boycott of the ceremony. In future years, rap Grammy results improved. Early 90s winners included LL Cool J, Dr. Dre and Queen Latifah. But it took a full decade and a quarter century after the birth of hip hop before a rapper took one of the top all genre prizes.

Speaker C: Everything is everything our philosophy possibly becomes.

Speaker B: Lauren Hill’s win was unquestionably a triumph, but it had no coattails. After miseducation, it was another five years before a hip hop album took the Grammys top prize. In 2004, Outcast won Album of the year with their penultimate release, the double CD speakerbox the Love Below, an album on which, again, Andre 3000 and Big Boy were singing as well as rapping.

Speaker C: All I.

Speaker B: 20 years later, speakerbox the Love Below remains the last hip hop album of any kind to take home. The general field album of the year in the Grammys continued their retrenchment even when the nominating committees put forward adventurous or just on trend music. The voters homed in on the middlebrow. In 2001, for example, the album of the year race included Eminem’s controversial the Marshall Mathers LP.

Speaker D: Anyways, I hope you get this man.

Speaker C: Hit me back. Just a chat.

Speaker D: Julio, yours the biggest fan? Just the sand.

ADVERTISEMENT

Speaker B: And Radiohead’s cutting edge kid a, both of which have been number one albums on the Billboard 200. But Grammy voters sidestepped the Eminem controversy and the Radiohead edginess and went instead with Steely Dan’s ultra Smooth 2000 comeback album, Two Against Nature, which had been off the album chart for months when it won. The sardonic, witty duo of Donald Fagan and Walter Becker, now relegated to elder statesman status, finally won the prestige prize decades past Steely Dan’s prime over a newer generation of upstarts.

Speaker D: Hanging tight.

Speaker B: Indeed, there was a lot of smooth music clogging the Grammy ballot in the aughts. It was the peak of the Socalled Starbucks album, easy listening, jazzy or rustic sounding cds that sold near the counter at the coffee chain. Album of the year winners that got their early boost as a side dish to a cafe latte included 2003 winner Come Away with me by jazz pop vocalist Nora Jones I waited till I saw the sun.

Speaker C: I don’t know why I didn’t come.

Speaker B: And soul legend Ray Charles’s final CD, Genius loves Company, which won in 2005 posthumously because Charles had died the prior June as part of Brother Ray’s Grammy sweep. His duet with Nora Jones, a song that had come nowhere near the charts, took record of the year as well.

Speaker C: No way to win.

Speaker D: Here we go. Yeah.

Speaker C: She’Ll break my heart.

Speaker B: And in 2008, Herbie Hancock’s river the Joni Letters, a CD of jazz covers of songs by Joni Mitchell, won an upset album of the year victory over Better remembered discs by Amy Winehouse and Kanye west. By the way, Nora Jones sang on Hancock’s album, too.

ADVERTISEMENT

Speaker C: He saw me mistrusting him, still acting kind he saw how I worried sometimes.

Speaker B: The other Grammy fixture in the decade of Starbucks albums was bluegrass vocalist Allison Krause, who provided her sterling pipes to the soundtrack of O Brother, where Art Thou? Winner of the 2002 album of the.

Speaker C: Year Grammy when I die, hallelujah by I fly away.

Speaker B: And seven years later, Krause teamed with veteran Led Zeppelin vocalist Robert Plant for the americana folk album Raising sand, a big winner at the 2009 Grammys. In Led Zeppelin’s heyday, the band’s music won Zero Grammys. The group was only nominated for and lost best New Artist in 1970. But as an elder statesman, Robert Plant and his new duet partner cleaned up sweeping album of the year as well.

Speaker E: As Record of the Year with Please.

Speaker B: Read the letter.

Speaker C: Please read the letter that I wrote please read the letter.

Speaker B: By the 2010s, even indie rock seemed venerable enough for the Grammys, especially as an alternative to rap and dance pop. In 2011, the Arcade Fire were shocked when their album the Suburbs took Album of the Year over Eminem, Lady Gaga, Lady Antebellum and Katy Perry. As with several prior 21st century winners, a fine album won for possibly the wrong reason.

Speaker C: Sometimes I can I’m moving past a feeling.

Speaker B: In 2014, electronic dance music took its first album of the year, when Daft Punk won for their final album, Random Access Memories. Not incidentally, it was the robotic french duo’s most retro sounding lp, she’s up.

Speaker C: All night to the sun I’m up all night to get sun she’s up all night for good fun I’m up all night to get lucky.

ADVERTISEMENT

Speaker B: The other Grammy trend that compounded in the 2010s was the repeat winner. Not since Stevie Wonder in the 70s had Grammy voters gone back to the same candidates so many times, whether it was Adele in 2012.

Speaker C: To the rain.

Speaker B: Watch it for or Adele in 2017.

Speaker C: Hello from the other side I must.

Speaker B: Have called Taylor Swift in 2010 and.

Speaker C: I said, tell me, take me somewhere we can be alone.

Speaker B: I’ll be wasting all this swift in 2016 steam got a long list of ex lovers.

Speaker C: They’ll tell you I’m insane because you know I love the players and you.

Speaker B: Love or swift in 2021.

Speaker C: You want my you are my or.

Speaker B: Bruno Mars, who kept winning record of the year in 2016.

Speaker C: Don’t believe it?

Speaker D: Just watch.

Speaker B: God in 2018, when he also took album of the year.

Speaker C: What y’all trying to do?

Speaker B: 24 Jarrett’s magic or in 2022, when Bruno took the prize with his retro style Anderson Pac duo project Silk Sonic.

Speaker C: I’m a leave the baby.

Speaker D: I’m a.

Speaker B: Leave the dow to be sure, Adele, Taylor, and Bruno were all leading lights of 2010s pop relatively deserving of their wins. But the blockade by these artists effectively locked out from the top all genre categories, such hip hop leading lights as Kendrick Lamar, who, by the way, has won a d*** Pulitzer, the only musician outside of classical and jazz to win that prize, but he’s never won a best album Grammy.

Speaker D: I’m homie, you f***** up but if God got us, then we go be all right we gon’be all right we.

ADVERTISEMENT

Speaker B: Gonna be all right and post hip hop r b queen Beyonce, who, despite now holding the record for most grammys ever won by a single artist. As of this podcast episode, she has 32, has won almost none of her prizes in the general field categories after releasing three of the most critically acclaimed and commercially successful albums of the last decade, Beyonce, lemonade and Renaissance, that feels rather unjust.

Speaker C: Like my negro nose with Jackson.

Speaker B: So could this have been avoided? What are some guidelines for good Grammy governance? How, hypothetically, should a conscientious, critically minded, and chart aware music fan vote for the awards? I don’t have a ballot, but I’m so glad you asked. Here’s the thing about complaining about the Grammys. You can’t make firm rules to improve them. You wind up contradicting yourself. It’s all well and good to say nobody should win album of the year multiple times. But then which of Stevie wonders or.

Speaker E: Taylor Swift’s big prizes would you take away?

Speaker B: It’s intuitive to say no artists past their prime should win a big Grammy. But then Paul Simon wins for Graceland at age 45, and he’s scoring hits again like he’s back in his prime. Or Bob Dylan finally wins album of the year for the first time at age 56 with 1990 seven’s time out of mind, and virtually everyone agrees. Good for Bob. It’s about time.

Speaker C: It’s not dark yet, but it’s getting there.

Speaker B: And look, as you have no doubt gathered throughout this hit parade episode, I am a chart follower and a lover of current pop.

Speaker E: I’d love to tell the Recording Academy.

ADVERTISEMENT

Speaker B: Stop giving statues to records that barely even charted. Nobody cares. Stop wagging your finger at the general public and then an album like John.

Speaker E: Batiste’s we are wins album of the.

Speaker B: Year in 2022 after charting no higher than number 86.

Speaker D: When I move about it just like this, I don’t know why, but I.

Speaker C: Feel like.

Speaker D: I hear a song that.

Speaker B: Takes me back and, well, am I going to be the jerk who says a musician’s musician like John Baptiste shouldn’t win a Grammy?

Speaker E: Not to be a spoil sport, but.

Speaker B: Personally, I would have given Baptiste some smaller prizes that year and given the big prize to Lil Nas X or Olivia Rodrigo. But that’s just me.

Speaker C: I guess you didn’t mean what you wrote in the song about me. You said forever. Now I drive alone.

Speaker B: So with my usual pile of caveats that what follows is meant to be not only subjective but suggestive, I am going to offer a top five list of Grammy guidelines. The idea is a hypothetical Grammy voter should mix and match these guidelines as best they can to come up with winners that feel credible, relevant, aiming for consensus, not coolness. Because let’s be real, the Grammys have never been cool, but at their best they can feel like they captured a moment in our culture. A Stevie Wonder moment, a Fleetwood Mac moment, a Michael Jackson moment, a u two moment, a Lauren Hill moment, an Adele moment. As long as the Grammys continue to exist, let’s aim for that Grammy guideline. One aim for cultural impact, or in other words, the charts are your friend. Not always, but often the Grammys miss the mark because they try to second guess popular taste. This has happened quite a bit in.

ADVERTISEMENT

Speaker D: The song categories, and so did I know when I remember spring.

Speaker E: This is.

Speaker B: The shadow of your smile, winner of the 1966 Grammy for song of the year. It’s a jazzy pop standard that has long outlasted the flop Elizabeth Taylor film the Sandpiper for which it was pinned. It’s been covered by dozens of artists, and this version by Tony Bennett reached number 95 on the Hot 100 in 1965.

Speaker E: All very respectable.

Speaker B: But among the other nominees that the shadow of your smile defeated in 1966 for song of the year was this yesterday?

Speaker D: All my troubles seem so far away that looks as though they’re here to stay.

Speaker B: The Beatles number one smash yesterday, which Guinness World Records estimates has been covered more than 2200 times. You want standards? This is a standard and a record that captured the zeitgeist in 1965. As I noted earlier in our Grammy history, the academy was slow to recognize the Beatles. Giving song of the year to yesterday would have been an easy way to do so. Something similar happened in record of the year in 2002. You too had won the prize in 2001 for their big hit beautiful day, and then they won again the following year for Walk on, a single from the same album that didn’t even make the Hot 100 and peaked in the.

Speaker E: Middle of Billboard’s rock charts.

Speaker C: Walk on, you got the can.

Speaker B: Listen, I am fond of you, too. But giving record of the year to the irish band two years in a row, the second time for a song that wasn’t even a major hit, was overkill. Two decades later, walk on has less than one 10th the Spotify streams of.

Speaker E: YouTube’s biggest songs, including Beautiful Day.

ADVERTISEMENT

Speaker B: Also at the 2002 Grammys, walk on beat, a pair of number one hits fallen by Alicia Keys.

Speaker C: In and out.

Speaker B: And Ms. Jackson by Outcast. Each of these hits has had a much longer legacy and much stronger Spotify streams. The charts are not a perfect yardstick by any means. Several Grammy winning lps that critics have complained about, like Natalie Cole’s unforgettable, Eric Clapton’s Unplugged, or Ray Charles’Genius loves company, did top the album chart. But in each case, these Grammy winners beat albums packed with chart conquering singles like Green Day’s American Idiot, Kanye West’s the College dropout, or Rem’s out of.

Speaker D: Time, that’s me in the corner.

Speaker C: That’S.

Speaker D: Me in the spotlight. Loosen my religion.

Speaker B: So whether it’s Frank Sinatra beating the Beatles in the mid 60s or Beck beating Beyonce in the mid ten? S, ask yourself, hypothetical Grammy voter, is.

Speaker E: It really a virtue, legacy wise, to.

Speaker B: Ignore the wisdom of the crowd? Maybe the crowd had a point. My second guideline is sort of a.

Speaker E: Corollary to the first.

Speaker B: You could even pair them together. Grammy guideline two don’t ignore cultural relevance or embrace current pop from rock and roll. In the hip hop in the beyond, there is always a genre or a sound that Grammy voters are leery of embracing. This often produces the most head scratching results and sometimes the most regrettable runners up.

Speaker C: She said, baby, let’s go when I told her, I said got done. Come again, yeah.

Speaker B: Usher’s twelve week, number one smash in 2004 and the lead single to his diamond selling blockbuster album, Confessions, was many Americans introduction to the sound of crunk, the southern rap subgenre pioneered by Lil John. Usher was nominated eight times at the Grammys of 2005, and he won three prizes, but only in the r and b genre categories. As noted earlier, the big prizes that year were taken by Ray Charles’s posthumous album and his duet with Nora Jones. Even if the academy felt obligated to honor the late Charles giving his single here we go again. Record of the year over Usher’s yeah is the pinnacle of avoiding cultural relevance. Something similar happened a decade earlier in the 1997 album of the year contest.

Speaker C: All by my Don’t Wanna be.

ADVERTISEMENT

Speaker B: Now let’s give Celine Dion’s 1996 album falling into you its props. It was a big hit, three weeks at number one diamond sales, several hit singles. This was not a case of the Recording Academy ignoring the charts when they gave it album of the year. Except Dion’s competition that year included the aforementioned Odelle by Beck, the Fuji’s seminal hip hop smash the score, a boy.

Speaker D: On the side of Babylon trying to front like you, down with Mount Zion.

Speaker B: Smashing Pumpkin’s magnum opus Melancholy and the infinite Sadness, and the acclaimed baby face produced soundtrack to waiting to exhale.

Speaker C: I’m not gonna cry, I’m not gonna say no. Tea? No, I’m not gonna all of these.

Speaker B: Were multi platinum albums. Yes, even becks, and all of them sounded more like the mid 90s than Celine Dion’s album did. Of course, it’s predictable that Grammy voters, given those five choices, would go with a showbiz pro like Celine Dion. But it doesn’t have to be inevitable.

Speaker C: I will be a father. I will be a preview.

Speaker B: When George Michael took Album of the year in 1989 with Faith, it was his first major win over such prior Grammy favorites as Bobby McFerron, Sting and Steve Winwood. Grammy voters are capable of looking past their industry faves toward pop upstarts, but that means accepting the idea that the sound of now could be more than a flash in the pan. Speaking of pop upstarts, Grammy guideline three when in doubt, reward youth. This is the opposite of what Grammy voters tend to do in the aughts. In particular, the oldster nominee seemed to win every time, Santana over TLC and the Chicks, steely Dan over Eminem and Radiohead, the late Ray Charles over Usher and Green Day, Herbie Hancock over Amy Winehouse and Kanye west. But on those occasions when Grammy voters go with the younger nominee, the results virtually always look good. In retrospect.

ADVERTISEMENT

Speaker C: What do you want for me? Why don’t you run for me? What are you wondering?

Speaker B: What do you in 2020, Billie Eilish was the youngest nominee in album of the year, record of the year, and song of the year, and she swept all of them. Four years later, as Eilish comes off an Oscar win, multiple Grammy wins, and is poised to dominate another award season, that 2020 sweep looks prescient, turns out.

Speaker C: I’m not real, just something you paid for. What was I made for?

Speaker B: Other youthful Grammy juggernauts include Stevie Wonder, 23 in 1974, Michael Jackson, 25 in 1984 Alanis Morissette, 21 in 1996 and Taylor Swift, who was only 20 when she took album of the year for the first time in 2010 with Fearless.

Speaker C: If you could see you been here all along, so why can’t you see?

Speaker B: Talk about betting on the right horse. Swift took the prize again in 2016 with her 1989 album and in 2021 with her lp folklore. This year, Taylor is a favorite again for album of the year for her 2022 blockbuster Midnights. I love Swift’s work and will understand if she wins a record setting fourth time in this category after the year she had in 2023. Who would be surprised? But I’m not necessarily rooting for Taylor this time because of my next rule. Grammy guideline four avoid repeat winners. Let’s pause and reflect right now on this cringeworthy moment. The last speech at the 2017 Grammys.

Speaker F: I, like a bit of me, has come back to myself, but I can’t possibly accept this award, and I’m very humbled and I’m very grateful and gracious. But my artist of my life is Beyonce. And this album, for me, the lemonade album was just so monumental. Beyonce, it was so monumental and so well thought out and so beautiful and soul bearing, and we all got to see another side to you that you don’t always let us see, and we appreciate that. And all us artists here, we f****** adore you. You are our light.

ADVERTISEMENT

Speaker B: That was Adele winning album of the year for her lp 25, and literally apologizing from the stage for defeating Beyonce’s Lemonade, the most acclaimed album of 2016. As fine as 25 was. The fact was, Adele didn’t need the prize. She’d already swept the awards in 2012 for her more acclaimed and even better selling 21 album. Now here’s another speech from a decade earlier at the 2006 Grammys. The speaker is Bono from YouTube.

Speaker D: This is our second album of the year, but we’ve lost two acting baby and all that you can’t leave behind. So now it feels Kanye, you’re next. And it’s a great artist. Been on the road with us. Extraordinary. Yes, sir.

Speaker B: However you may feel about Kanye west now, his album late registration was 2000 and five’s most celebrated lp and a Grammy win in 2006 over YouTube’s less acclaimed how to dismantle an atomic bomb.

Speaker E: Probably would have saved a lot of.

Speaker B: Headaches at future award shows. More to the point, as with Adele in 2017, when the winner of a.

Speaker E: Prize feels they have to provide an.

Speaker B: Apologia live from the stage, the voters probably got it wrong, and as Bono indicated in his speech, you too had been nominated numerous times and won before for the Joshua Tree. Not giving the prize to a repeat winner might not only have gotten Beyonce a top Grammy in 2017, it might have gotten Kendrick Lamar a Grammy in 2016 for his to pimp a Butterfly LP, which was defeated by repeat winner Taylor Swift.

Speaker D: One question b****, where you and I was walking now run a game got the whole world talking king kunta everybody want to cut the legs off him Kuta black man taking no luck oh.

ADVERTISEMENT

Speaker B: Yeah b****, where you don’t come after me swifties I love 1989, but Kendrick over Taylor that year is an easy call. Not giving Paul Simon a repeat Grammy in 1976. Remember, he’d already won with Simon and Garfunkel and would win again a decade later for Graceland might have made room for Elton John’s album Captain Fantastic and the Brown Dirt Cowboy to take the prize. Weirdly, Elton John has never won album of the year.

Speaker C: Someone said my life, sugar baby.

Speaker B: The point is, when checking boxes for a previous winner, especially in the big categories, the conscientious voter should consider the opportunity cost of sending that winner back to the podium. You may be missing the chance to correct a historic oversight, which brings me to my last edict. Grammy guideline five hip hop is music. I feel I need to say this as plainly as possible. 50 years after the birth of hip hop, the recording academy still seems to be coming to terms with the idea that rap is not only musical but worthy of its major all genre prizes. Jay Z put it succinctly in 2018 on a joint single with his wife, Beyonce, billed to the Carters just after Jay had gone zero for eight at that year’s Grammys.

Speaker D: Tell the Grammys, f*** that opa ace s***. Have you ever seen the crowd going ape s***? My money fast, up fast.

Speaker B: Although the Carters do have plenty of Grammys between them, 32 for her, 24 for him, 56 in total. Plus daughter Blue Ivy Carter has one of her own. The fact that none of these prizes are in an all genre category is remarkable. The only exception is Beyonce’s single ladies, which in 2010 took the all genre song of the year prize and that award went to its songwriters, not be herself. Beyonce, I would venture, has been overlooked in the top categories even as a superlative r B singer for her proximity to rap and hip hop culture. Again, to reiterate, there have only been two hip hop album of the year winners Lauryn Hills and Outkasts, and both were fronted by non rap singles. This should be a source of regret for the Recording Academy. In addition to B. J. Kanye and Kendrick, major category nominees that have been blanked include MC Hammer, Coolio, TLC, Nelly, Eminem, Ludicrous, Lil Wayne and Missy Elliott.

ADVERTISEMENT

Speaker C: Come on, is it worth it? Let me work it I put my thing down, flip it and reverse it.

Speaker B: So the conscientious Grammy voter should keep this in mind. There is a lot of unfortunate history to redress here. Rappers as late as the are getting the same cold shoulder from the academy that rock was getting in the early 60s. Where does this leave this year’s ballot? The Grammys of 2024 prior wins for John Batiste and Taylor Swift would invoke my no repeats guideline. So sorry John and Tayte.

Speaker C: It’s me, hi, I’m the problem, it’s me and he tight.

Speaker B: Everybody agrees the indie supergroup boy Genius is a strong contender. Their album the record charted well, peaking at number four, and it has had a significant cultural impact. If a bit like Beck in 2015, they would certainly feel fresh were they to win.

Speaker C: The way I am not strong.

Speaker B: I would also strongly consider Olivia Rodrigo, who certainly fulfills my cultural impact and youth guidelines. She’s only 20.

Speaker E: Her superb second lp, guts, debuted at.

Speaker B: Number one and is still lodged in the top ten, and it generated a number one hot 100 smash with vampire. About the only small strike against Rodrigo is she already won best new artist two years ago.

Speaker C: I was smart, she made me look so give away.

Speaker B: But the artist who really sweeps all five of my Grammy guidelines is this year’s nominations frontrunner SZA. On every level, SZA deserves to win it.

Speaker C: When I’m with you, how can us know that? Missed a moment.

Speaker B: You just so important nobody cultural impact check. Sos spent ten weeks at number one last year.

Speaker E: Cultural relevance check.

ADVERTISEMENT

Speaker B: SZ’s music is very awkward and has been played across radio formats from pop to rap to even alternative rock. Youth check. SZA is 34, not the youngest in this year’s Grammy race, but the same age as Taylor Swift, a non repeater. Check. SZA has only won one prior Grammy in a genre category for a supporting role on a doja cat single and finally, a benefit to hip hop. Big check. Though SZA’s music is broadly categorized as R B, and she sings, not raps, she is this generation’s queen of hip hop soul. For a voter, following my guidelines, Scissor.

Speaker C: Is a slam dunkin nobody, nobody like you do. You do.

Speaker B: Of course, I am prepared to be disappointed, as I so often am, when I sit down to watch the Grammys on February 4. Honestly, I mostly watch in the hopes it will be a good show stuffed with music. The Grammy show is often more lively than the Oscars, the Emmys and even the Golden Globes. And truly, the awards are a sideshow on the Grammys in the days after the telecast. The biggest chart impact comes from the performances, not who gave the best speech. It’s as if the audience has decided the music is what matters. Also, I kind of enjoy those weird Grammy mashups, one time collaborations like Kendrick Lamar and Imagine dragons, Sting and Bruno Mars or Eminem and Elton John. Some are train wrecks. I’m still recovering from Gwyneth Paltrow with Ceelo Green and the Muppets in 2011. But honestly, the wtfness is often part of the fun. Like my favorite WTF Grammy moment of all time, the 1985 synthesizer showdown.

Speaker D: Dateline February 26 Los Angeles Earth Asylum Grammy Award ceremony.

Speaker B: Picture it Stevie Wonder, Herbie Hancock, Thomas Dolby in a Beethoven wig, and Howard Jones standing behind a bank of synths and computers playing a Frankenstein’s monster of a pop medley. I watch it on YouTube at least once a year. I get back in touch with my inner teen Gen Xer, and I remind myself that at the end of the day and another year of music, the Grammys are kind of important, kind of silly, and should be fun.

Speaker D: Activate. Activate. Activate.

Speaker B: I hope you enjoyed this episode of Hit Parade. Our show was written, edited and narrated by Chris Mulanthy. That’s me. My producer is Kevin Bendis. Derek John is executive producer of narrative podcasts, and we had help from Joel Meyer. Alicia Montgomery is vp of audio for Slate podcasts. Check out their roster of shows@slate.com. Slash podcasts.

Speaker E: You can subscribe to hit parade wherever.

Speaker B: You get your podcasts, in addition to finding it in the slate culture feed. If you’re subscribing on Apple Podcasts, please rate and review us while you’re there. It helps other listeners find the show. Thanks for listening, and I look forward to leading the hit parade back your way. Until then, keep on marching on the one. I’m Chris. Melanie.

Speaker D: She had a real good man. I’m dead and dark.

My Daughter Did a Favor for a Popular Girl at School. Her Brother Told Me How It Ended.
Discover
Senate Republicans Are Poised to Deal a Shattering Blow to the Filibuster
Discover
SightMax
|
Sponsored by Taboola
Tired of Blurry Vision? This Quick Trick Could Change Everything
Read More
Skip
I Just Saved My Wife From Her Wildly Entitled Sister. But Now She’s Angry at Me!
Discover
My Uncle the Priest Is Coming to Visit for Father’s Day, and My Mom Has Made an Unholy Request
Discover
MD Reveals: Skin Looks Years Younger When You Eat This Daily
Top doctor urges aging seniors to eat this for aging skin
Gundry MD
|
Sponsored
Learn More
Cinnamon: The Greatest Enemy of Blood Sugar
Magazine Glyco
|
Sponsored
Learn More
The Greatest Enemy of Blood Sugar? Try This Tonight!
Magazine Glyco
|
Sponsored
Learn More
Here's What A Walk-In Shower Should Cost
Brilliant custom solutions for every budget.
Kohler Showers
|
Sponsored
Learn More
Cinnamon: The Greatest Enemy Of Blood Sugar (See How To Use It)
See this amazing trick rigth now!
bloghealthnet
|
Sponsored
Learn More
People Are Replacing Their Hearing Aids With This
See why audiologists are calling it a breakthr ough in hearing technology.
hear.com
|
Sponsored
Mix 4 Kitchen Ingredients, Wake Up Thinner Every Morning
Health Now
|
Sponsored
Cinnamon: The Hidden Blood Sugar Enemy? Try This Tonight!
Cinnamon Help
|
Sponsored
Learn More
Experts Tested 17 Hearing Aids. Their #1 Pick Will Shock You
See why audiologists are calling it a breakthrough in hearing technology.
hear.com
|
Sponsored
Using Glucometer? See The main Enemy of Sugar Spikes
harmonyessencehub
|
Sponsored
Unraveling the Secret of Pink Salt for Natural Weight Loss
Lisamega
|
Sponsored
Learn More
Pink Salt for Weight Loss Has Gone Viral: What Experts Say
Lisamega
|
Sponsored
Learn More
My Sister Took My Daughter to the Mall. My Wife Is Livid at the Condition She Returned Her In.
Slate Magazine
It’s Becoming Clearer What Trump Really Wants From Russia
Slate Magazine
Men Over 50: Tired of Frequent Urges and Weak Flow? Try This 30-Second...
Enlarged Prostate Has Nothing To Do With Age: Just Stop Doing This One Common...
healthydayscare
|
Sponsored
Click Here
Over 50 and Going Too Often? Here's a Bedtime Routine That Might Help
Enlarged Prostate Has Nothing To Do With Age: Just Stop Doing This One Common...
healthydayscare
|
Sponsored
Click Here
3 Ways Japanese People Use Pink Salt to Lose Weight
Nutrition With Pink Salt
|
Sponsored
Learn More
4 Ways Japanese People Use Himalayan Salt to Lose Weight
Nutrition With Pink Salt
|
Sponsored
Learn More
See where your glucose has been and where it’s headed. 
With Dexcom G7, you’ll see your glucose in real time. It even shows if you’re trending high or going low, so you can make more confident...
Dexcom
|
Sponsored
Click Here
MOST POPULAR
My Ex-Husband “Punished” Our 5-Year-Old for Discovering His Affair. I’m Livid.
Slate Magazine
MOST POPULAR
My Roommate Just Admitted She Has Hated Me For a Year. Her Reason Is Nonsensical.
Slate Magazine
Unlock a Phone Deal (See How)
Discover Amazing Phone Deals. Get The Latest Models At Unbeatable Prices
Qsearch | Search Ads
|
Sponsored
View Deals
Phone Deals You'll Love (See Deals)
Discover Amazing Phone Deals. Get The Latest Models At Unbeatable Prices
Qsearch | Search Ads
|
Sponsored
View Deals
Unsold Cars with Zero Miles: Get Them Dirt Cheap
GoSearches | Search Ads
|
Sponsored